2.3. Dimension 3: Security of energy supply   i. National objectives with regard to diversifying energy sources and supply from third countries in order to increase the resilience of regional and national energy systems  The existing grid infrastructure, power plant capacity and domestic energy resources mean that Austria has a high level of security of supply. The top priority in the transformation of the energy system is to maintain that high level of security of supply. The objective is to strengthen the security of supply and become less dependent on imported energy. To achieve this, Austria aims to further develop domestic (especially renewable) energy sources. This includes the objective of generating 100% of total electricity consumption (national balance) from domestic renewable energy sources in 2030, with certain justified exemptions (see point 2.1.2, sub-point i). Likewise, the objectives set out in points 2.1 and 2.2, and the associated measures, have a positive impact on the increased security of energy supply.  On the European stage, Austria is committed to further diversification of energy imports, coordinated at EU level, and to improved international coordination in crisis situations.  Austria is also actively involved in the process for Projects of Common Interests (PCI). These projects in the electricity and gas sector are designed to meet challenges such as increasing energy demand, ensure security of supply or overcome bottlenecks. Due to its central geographic location, Austria is particularly affected by north-south connections and energy flows, and must therefore increasingly balance out volatility in renewable energy generation.  In October, the European Commission presented the draft for a Delegated Regulation on the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 89 of 268  fourth PCI list. If no objections are raised by the Council or the European Parliament, the delegated act will enter into force after the expiry of the objection period of two months (renewable once); this is likely to be in the first quarter of 2020.  Irrespective of the final result on the fourth PCI list, Austria will support the projects proposed by Austrian project promoters for the fourth PCI list.     ii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to reducing energy import dependency from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems  Security of supply indicators have shown positive developments over the last 10 years in Austria. The net import tangent, which shows the level of dependence on imports, has fallen significantly since 2005, from 71.8% to 64.2%. Since the beginning of the decade, natural gas storage capacity in Austria has risen from 4.6 bcm to the current capacity of 8 bcm, a trend that is set to continue. Similarly, emergency oil reserves, standing at more than a quarter of the average annual consumption, are greater than the obligatory emergency reserves required by the International Energy Agency (IEA). The objective of promoting the development of renewable energy, and above all renewable electricity, provides an opportunity to increase the scale of decentralised domestic energy supply and strengthen regional supply concepts. The development of renewable energy in the electricity sector will also be instrumental in achieving the objective of eliminating dependency on imports by 2030 (see also point 2.3., sub-point i). The national targets for this are set out in points 2.1. and 2.2. Alongside related measures, this has a positive impact on reducing dependence on energy imports from third countries. Similarly, the feed-in of renewable gas (bio-methane from biogenic residue), hydrogen and other renewable gas production methods (synthetic methane, etc.) will play a significant role within the gas sector in the future.  Reserve and storage systems should also ensure that sufficient time is available for adaptation measures in the event of undersupply, and sufficient diversification of oil supply countries will spread the risk of supply bottlenecks.  Austria also wishes to further cement its role as an important hub for the European electricity and gas market and as a storage facility to guarantee supply security for the whole of Europe. As a result, in 2017, approximately 10% of EU natural gas imports were handled via the Baumgarten hub and in the electricity sector approximately 5% of all exports and 7% of all imports were physically transported through the European transmission grid via the Austrian interconnectors.  iii. National objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular by means of deploying domestic energy sources, demand response and energy storage Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 90 of 268   The objective is to strengthen the security of supply and become less dependent on imported energy. In order to achieve this, not only is it necessary to increase the production of renewable domestic energy sources, it is also necessary to use energy in a more efficient and intelligent manner. Our infrastructure must allow for new developments on the energy market, decentralised production, new storage technologies and digitalisation. With a target of a 100%-balanced power supply from renewable energy in 2030, sufficient balancing and control energy must be available and the flexibility needed for grid operation must be maintained at all times so that this can be achieved economically and ecologically. High-efficiency combined heat and power plants (CHP plants) needed to maintain the power and heat supply, especially in urban areas, are particularly important here, as are storage and pumped storage facilities.  Furthermore, this multidimensional strategy aims to increase investment in storage infrastructure (from short-term storage up to seasonal storage) and transmission and distribution networks should be increased or adapted to meet the increased demand.  Optimal use will be made of existing efficient plants in line with climate and energy targets. The economic investments already made in power lines, storage facilities and power plants will make a proactive contribution to the transformation of the energy system. This existing capacity should be used and the existing network infrastructure must take on additional tasks (e.g. power-to-gas, power-to-heat, wind-to-hydrogen, power-to-liquids). Within the scope of hydroelectric power, the operation of existing installations, including the exploitation of their potential for flexibility, should be ensured in accordance with the implementation of the Water Framework Directive.     