3.3. Dimension 3: Security of energy supply   i. Policies and measures related to diversifying energy supply (including third countries), reducing dependence on imports and increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular through the deployment of domestic energy sources, demand response and energy storage    Maintain efficient existing installations Key to integrated urban development is a central heating and cooling supply to conurbations which uses waste heat from existing high-efficiency CHP plants, waste incineration, industrial waste heat and the efficient use of heat from biomass plants. Existing wind and hydroelectric installations, and high-efficiency biomass plants in agriculture and industry will continue to contribute towards the 100% renewable electricity target and towards a renewable heating supply. Land and resource take is minimised by retaining existing high-efficiency plants, thereby transforming the energy system in an environmentally-friendly way.  Long-term supply security, in particular in energy-intensive industries, is largely based at present on natural gas, which will only be partially possible to substitute in the medium term. Sufficient quantities of stored natural gas will also be available in the future in order to help overcome any crisis situations.  Storage capacity Significant investment in storage infrastructure and transmission and distribution networks will be made which is adapted to increased demand. Previous economic investment (e.g. in infrastructure facilities, pipelines, storage facilities, power plants) will contribute towards transforming the energy system. It is essential for existing capacity to be used and for available energy infrastructure to take on additional tasks (e.g. power-to-gas, power-to-heat, Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 176 of 268  wind-to-hydrogen, power-to-liquids).  Austria also plays an important role as a key hub in the European gas market, including for gas storage. It will continue to play this role in the context of overall supply security in Europe. Austria works closely with international energy organisations in multilateral energy policy matters, actively participating in order to ensure secure, transparent, competitive and sustainable energy markets and systems.  Furthermore, electrochemical energy storage facilities will be promoted as both large- and small-scale storage units represent a possible solution to balancing the supply-dependent generation characteristics of renewable energy.  Storage facilities will also be remunerated for operating in the interests of the system. Given that new storage technology makes a significant contribution towards transforming the energy system, the flexibility of the technology will be recognised in how grid tariffs are designed. Storage facilities will be exempt from fees applicable to end consumption and will benefit from support for green electricity.  Storage facilities in deep geothermal energy systems will also benefit from support. Geothermal energy as a renewable energy source which is capable of feeding into baseload capacity can contribute considerably to supply security. Contrary to shallow geothermal energy, deep geothermal projects allow higher temperatures to be used. Use of existing oil and natural gas wells in exhausted deposits offers potential synergies, in particular by minimising the risk of unsuccessful drilling and high drilling costs. Increased use of geothermal energy requires adaptation of the legal framework conditions.  Energy storage facilities are also a focus of the Austrian energy innovation plan. The availability of competitive energy storage facilities able to store renewable electricity on a larger scale for longer periods of time is becoming very important. Special emphasis will therefore be placed on promoting applied research projects with pilot plants demonstrating the marketability of scalable storage technology.  Demand response See point 3.4.3, sub-points ii and v.     ii. Regional cooperation in this area  During the process of drawing up the draft National Energy and Climate Plan, regional cooperation has taken place with AustriHungary, Slovenia and Italy, as well as with Poland, Croatia and Belgium. As part of this, the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 177 of 268  majority of Member States, including Austria, have chosen to invite each other to cooperation meetings. Each of these meetings saw several Member States come together to inform one another of the contents of their respective draft NECPs and to identify possible connecting factors enabling closer cooperation.  In the scope of the energy security dimension, there was above all discussion of the following subjects for closer cooperation:   Cooperation in the scope of existing EU regulations (Security of Gas Supply Regulation/Regulation on risk management in the field of electricity, etc.)  Exchange on scenarios and assumptions for the expected use of different energy sources.    For further details, also see point 1.4, Regional cooperation     iii. (National and EU) financing measures  To implement the planned measures under the National Energy and Climate Plan, there will be considerable need for investment, which must equally comprise contributions from public authorities (Federal Government, provinces, EU) and the private sector within the meaning of the long-term objectives of the Paris Agreement (in particular Article 2.1.c). The auction of certificates in the EU Emission Trading Scheme generates income for Member States, which may constitute a significant source for financing climate protection measures. The overall investment volume ultimately expected for achieving the targets is decisively determined by the assumed mix of regulatory, support and tax measures. The cost-effectiveness of the climate- and energy-relevant support landscape has an equally determining effect on investment as the expected effect of regulatory plans and/or the degree of effectiveness of new instruments in the area of -relevant financing flows, but can also constitute directly relevant contributions to adhering to the Energy Union objectives