3.2. Dimension 2: Energy efficiency   i. Planned measures and programmes to achieve national energy efficiency contributions and for energy efficiency obligation schemes under Article 7a and 7b of Directive 2012/27/EU in the version of Directive 2018/2002/EU, including measures in the building sector  Improving energy efficiency and thereby reducing energy consumption in the long term is an important lever in achieving long-term climate goals, alongside the use of renewable energy. In technology which may greatly help to improve energy efficiency. This includes, for example, continuously improving the energy efficiency of the building stock (thermal renovation and high standards for new buildings) and focusing on electromobility in transport. These and other initiatives will be stepped up over the coming years in order to comply   Austria believes it is essential for primary energy intensity to be continuously reduced (energy/GDP). Austria has set itself a target of improving primary energy intensity by between 25% and 30% as compared to 2015. In order to meet this target, the following measures are laid down in the Climate and Energy Strategy (#mission2030) and in the current government programme:  A number of these measures for promoting energy efficiency have already been discussed under point 3.1., sub-point i on transport, buildings and heating. The most important areas are outlined below:  Evaluate and develop the Energy Efficiency Act. Much of the Energy Efficiency Directive will be transposed by the Federal Energy Efficiency Act. In addition to the energy saving efficiency target, the example being set by the public sector and rules on combating energy poverty (minimising energy poverty in accordance with climate and energy targets). Compliance with the implementation obligation under EU law (25 June 2020) is being strived for.  By pushing for SMEs to introduce energy management systems, energy consumption will Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 171 of 268  be reduced and competitiveness bolstered as a result.  A support programme for implementing energy and environment management systems for SMEs;  Use of commercial and industrial waste heat through geographically tailored information on existing waste heat potential (a Heat Map in accordance with Article 14 of the Energy Efficiency Directive) and through cost-benefit analyses on the use of waste heat potential and support;  Preparation/implementation of pilot projects for    Investment in thermal building renovation, high-efficiency home technology and energy management systems in buildings (see also point 3.1., sub-point i on buildings and heating);  Examining a reduction in the depreciation period for investments in certain energy efficiency measures;  Including energy efficiency and climate protection in learning curricula and technical training programmes;  Greater integration of energy use, energy efficiency, resources and climate protection in education overall will make energy-saving attractive;  Improving training for professionals;  Extensive awareness-raising initiatives will familiarise all members of society with the importance of climate protection, energy efficiency and of using energy resources carefully;  Promoting energy advisory services in all sectors will enable efficient use of energy;  coordination with the BMVIT as a preparatory phase for the experimental clause. It will provide an experimental space for companies to test the systematic application of new integration and market models for system integration of renewable energy technology, storage and energy efficiency technology;  Further development of support for commercial energy efficiency improvements and energy-saving measures;  Public authorities (Federal Government, provinces, municipalities) setting an example as regards energy efficiency and energy savings under the Energy Efficiency Act (Federal Government), agreements (Federal Government and provinces) and support (municipalities);  Applying the best tenderer principle by incorporating life cycle energy consumption into Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 172 of 268  public procurement (total cost of ownership).    ii. Long-term renovation strategy (residential and service buildings, public and private)  Residential buildings: The renovation strategy will be prepared at national level and submitted to the European Commission by 10 March 2020 in accordance with Article 46(1) of the Regulation on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action.  Service buildings: The renovation strategy will be prepared at national level and submitted to the European Commission by 10 March 2020 in accordance with Article 46(1) of the Regulation on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action.  Public buildings (Federal Government): A new energy saving target for the period 2021-2030 was set for central government buildings, i.e. buildings owned and used by the Federal Government, in the amount of 84.7 GWh on the basis of the currently available building data in accordance with Article 5 of Directive 2012/27/EU in the version of Directive 2018/2002/EU. This is a provisional value, as the survey of the building data of the central government and the associated saving target are being updated in 2020.    iii. Description of measures to promote energy services (e.g. contracting) in the public sector  The savings obligation for federal buildings (buildings owned and used by the Federal Government) under Section 16(1) of the Federal Energy Efficiency Act (EEffG, BGBl. I No 72/2014) is a major incentive for savings contracting measures. The target for the period 2014-2020 is 48.2 GWh. The Federal Energy Efficiency Act refers to energy savings contracting, energy management measures and renovation measures. Projects are established in an action plan. Notably, energy savings contracting measures have been successful to date, resulting in the savings achieved representing further incentives for future energy savings contracts. Support instruments are in principle open to such owners and forms of service. Further savings obligations and energy efficiency measures are provided for the period 2021-2030 on the basis of the 2020 building survey.  iv. Other planned measures for achieving the indicative target by 2030  The national Energy Efficiency Act, which transposes, amongst other legislation, the new Energy Efficiency Directive, was evaluated between September 2018 and July 2019. The transposition of the Directive is currently still in preparation. Consequently, no specific measures have yet been Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 173 of 268  put in place.  v. Measures for improving the energy efficiency of gas and electricity infrastructure  At present, no specific measures are planned.  vi. Regional cooperation in this area (where applicable)  Under the draft National Energy and Climate Plan, no regional cooperation has yet been agreed in this area. Austria would refer to the derogation provided for under Article 11 of the Regulation on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action according to which regional cooperation shall not be necessary until finalising the Plan in 2019. A meeting on regional cooperation took place on 20 November 2018 in Bratislava with the involvement of Slovakia, Czechia, Hungary and Poland.  vii. (National and EU) financing measures  To implement the planned measures under the National Energy and Climate Plan, there will be considerable need for investment, which must equally comprise contributions from public authorities (Federal Government, provinces, EU) and the private sector within the meaning of the long-term objectives of the Paris Agreement (in particular Article 2.1.c PA). The auction of certificates in the EU Emission Trading Scheme generates income for Member States, which may constitute a significant source for financing climate protection measures. The overall investment volume ultimately expected for achieving the targets is decisively determined by the assumed mix of regulatory, support and tax measures. The cost-effectiveness of the climate- and energy-relevant support landscape has an equally determining effect on investment as the expected effect of regulatory plans and/or the degree of effectiveness of new instruments in the area of t-relevant financing flows, but can also constitute directly relevant contributions to adhering to the Energy Union objectives.  viii. Measures for supporting local energy communities  E5 programme The e5 programme offers support for municipalities looking to use energy in a more efficient and environmentally-friendly manner and to step up their use of renewable energy. To this end, each province has a programme promoter who is available to help municipalities. Ideas, knowledge and personal commitment to energy matters from residents are, above all, an important pillar of the programme. Each e5 community forms an e5 team composed of residents, experts, representatives of environmental groups, companies, municipalities, etc. who are not associated with political structures. As an initial step, the e5 team examines which options for improving energy use are already in place on the basis of a list of measures. Subsequently, suggestions are made as to how energy efficiency could be further improved. E5 municipalities undergo regular Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 174 of 268  5 programme.  Climate and energy model regions the potential for energy savings, and sustain their economies. Climate and energy model regions promote cooperation between municipalities. A key factor behind the success of the programme is that the regions bring about procedural and structural change due to the close ties with decision-makers and citizens. Moreover, they are able to initiate a considerable number of measures. Domestic Environmental Support and the Climate Fund offer tailor-made investment support for climate and energy model regions, resulting in more than 4,000 successful projects so far in fields such as renewable energy, energy efficiency, sustainable mobility and awareness-raising. The in situ driving force behind every climate and energy model region is the model region manager. Model region managers initiate and organise projects so as to successfully implement the climate and energy policy objectives of regional plans and act as the central contact person. There are currently 91 climate and energy model regions in Austria.  Since 2016, the methodology applied under the e5 programme has also been used to ensure the quality of climate and energy model regions. Currently, some 3 million people live in an eS municipality or climate and energy model region.  Austrian Climate Alliance The Climate Alliance is a global partnership dedicated to combating climate change. It was founded in Frankfurt in 1990 and now brings into contact over 1,700 municipalities and towns/cities in 26 European countries with the indigenous peoples of Latin America. Through this partnership, Climate Alliance Austria has been supporting the indigenous peoples of the Upper Rio Negro, in the extreme northwest of Brazil, since 1993.  With its eight regional offices, Climate Alliance Austria is active in every province of Austria (Vienna/Burgenland, Lower Austria, Upper Austria, Salzburg, Styria, Carinthia, Tyrol and Vorarlberg). Provinces, municipalities, businesses and educational institutions are able to join the Climate Alliance. The common objectives of the Climate Alliance are to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in Europe - with their negative impact on the climate - by supporting indigenous partners in implementing local climate protection measures and preserving the rainforest in South America. The core work of Climate Alliance Austria consists of information and awareness-raising, networking, training of Climate Alliance partners, and carrying out projects and campaigns.  Renewable energy communities under the Renewable Energy Expansion Act (see point 3.1.2, sub-point i for further information) Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 175 of 268  The Renewable Energy Directive 2018 requires that renewable energy communities are established. This Directive is transposed by the Renewable Energy Expansion Act. These communities enable bilateral supply contracts to be set up and, likewise, cooperative-type structures for the generation, storage and supply of renewable electricity, even beyond property boundaries. In so doing, it is possible to set up and operate local grid structures (microgrids) cost-effectively. Regionalisation and decentralisation of renewable electricity generation, taking improve supply security and the robustness of the system in general