Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 98 of 268  2,593, 39% higher than the average for all households, which is EUR 1,868. The difference in the average share of energy costs compared to household income is equally high: the average share for non-energy-poor households is around 4.5%, while for energy-poor households it is 22.8%. The difference between relative share of each energy source within the overall energy costs for both groups of households is particularly high for heating oil: in the period in question, 2013-14, non-energy-poor households show a share of energy costs for oil heating of 14%, while for energy-poor households this share is 21%. On top of the high costs for energy-poor households with mostly oil heating, the high volatility of heating oil prices in comparison with other energy sources leads to increased uncertainty regarding future costs. In general, the main reason for the high energy costs incurred by energy-poor households is the poor thermal quality of the building envelope and the use of an expensive energy source for heating.  According to statistics (EU-SILC), as well as households with oil heating systems, those more heavily affected by energy poverty are households in buildings built prior to 1960, households in one- and two-family houses, households with larger heated living areas, single households and homeowners.  During the period in question, 2013-14, while in buildings built prior to 1960 around 5.1% of households were affected by energy poverty, for buildings built between 1991 and 2005 this figure was only 1.5% and for post-2006 buildings it was 0% (average for all buildings: 3.2%). The percentage of energy-poor households in one- and two-family houses during 2013-14 was 3.8%, while in multi-family houses it was 2.6% (average for all buildings: 3.2%).  Analysis of structural parameters, final energy use and energy costs from the micro-census  confirms these results (primarily based on EU-SILC) and also shows that households with oil heating, but also households with natural gas heating, belong to the group of households with high specific energy consumption values (kWh annual final energy use/m2 of living space), i.e. buildings with poor thermal energy efficiency.     2.5. Dimension 5: research, innovation and competitiveness   i. National strategies and financial objectives (public and private, where available) relating to research and innovation in the energy sector  The Climate and Energy Strategy adopted by the Federal Government in April 2018 clearly sets out the key role that research and technological development have to play in Austria in terms of global decarbonisation.  Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 99 of 268  Mission-oriented research and innovation by business and the government, in collaboration with research institutes and users, is needed to support the development and trialling of ground-breaking energy innovations. The strategic considerations required to implement the objectives of the Climate and Energy Strategy are as follows:  Cooperation between business and government Close cooperation between the government and business is a key factor for success in Austria. Intense collaboration between the state and private investors opens up major opportunities in link with business and implementation.  Creation of a research-friendly environment Transformation of the mobility and energy systems depends on firms and (research) institutes having sufficiently qualified staff. The aim, therefore, is to significantly increase the number of energy researchers in universities, polytechnics and non-university research institutions. Developing and expanding targeted measures to attract young researchers to the energy sector and creating or developing education services along the research/innovation/market value added chain should help to achieve this. Even though the majority of questions are technical/scientific questions, care must be taken to ensure that questions relating to the design of socio-technical and socio-economic systems and interfaces and social science questions (acceptance of techniques, system transition and change in the economic system) are also answered. Networking between the people involved in theoretical research and practical application is important in terms of increasing the relevance of research results. Improving the transfer of knowledge and technology, especially from universities to industry, should help to generate socially relevant applications or added market value from the research results obtained. Creating or developing joint research infrastructure in the energy system and an integrative approach between research and transition to market (e.g. in terms of economic, legal and regulatory requirements) will help Austrian energy researchers and firms to position themselves better on the European and global market.  Integrated funding portfolio from basic research through to transition to market Breakthrough technologies are used both to save energy and, increasingly, when using energy. In order to boost these advances, a new environment needs to be created for oriented basic research, alongside ways of increasing integration of the innovative capacity of entrepreneurs and start-ups in RTI initiatives.  In particular, between 2021 and 2030, impact network approaches will also be developed, which enable cooperation between international, national and regional players in relation to solutions and technology providers, users, and enablers and decision-makers in relation to the choice of technology. These approaches will also encourage closer links between various European, Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 100 of 268  national and regional measures and programmes in terms of research, technology and innovation, and implementation.  Mission-oriented research priorities Future energy systems will comprise connected sub-systems which will need to integrate several parties and types of technology. By pooling actors, resources and expertise, research, development and innovation can be implemented in a mission-oriented way for specific challenges in the energy system.  Development of key technologies A further objective is that of modernising the energy systems by developing key technologies. The aim is to develop successful technologies and solutions that will allow Austrian industry to position itself as an innovation leader on the global technology markets.  Sector coupling Development of integrated system solutions for coupling infrastructure, technologies and services for power, gas, heat and mobility.  Digital and smart energy: ensuring system integration of new energy storage and energy supply system flexibility technologies as basic enablers for a high proportion of renewable energy, coupled with security and resilience.  Marketable comprehensive solutions and technology-based services: developing new business models in connection with digitalisation, taking account of new social trends.  Contribution to European and international initiatives As innovative firms cannot afford not to internationalise, not least due to globalisation and the relatively confined home market, they are supported in this challenging growth phase. The successful positioning of Austrian energy technology suppliers depends, first, on active networking of and collaboration between Austrian operators in international RTI initiatives (e.g. by (SET) Plan or International Energy Agency collaboration programmes) and, second, on strategic pooling of individual strengths to give comprehensive solutions that can be easily presented and communicated.  Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 101 of 268  The BMVIT energy and mobility research programmes and the Climate and Energy Fund  In order to implement the energy research initiative set out in #mission2030 under the Austrian Climate and Energy Strategy, it is necessary not only to increase the energy and mobility research budget but also to participate in the development of European value chains (IPCEI on batteries and hydrogen), which should trigger up to another billion euros in private investment. Thanks to anchored in the Climate and Energy Strategy, it should be possible to leverage around EUR 2 to 2.5 billion of private investment in energy and mobility innovation in Austria by 2030. The implementation plan for the Energy Research Initiative in the Climate and Energy Strategy (see Chapter 3.5) involved a comprehensive consultation process with Austrian companies in this regard. This budget will be used for Flagship Projects 9 and 10 of #mission2030 in particular.  Flagship Project 9: Future energy systems will comprise interconnected sub-systems, which will need to integrate several parties and types of technology. Through the use of mission-oriented research and development priorities, it should be possible to develop successful technologies and solutions that will allow Austria to position itself as an innovation leader on the global markets.  Plus energy areas which, by optimising civil infrastructure, are able to cover all energy needs via renewable energy - the highest possible efficiency in all areas of end energy consumption and the development of suitable business models (Smart Cities).  Integrated regional energy systems which will enable the local and regional energy supply to become up to 100% renewable in the foreseeable future and help businesses and private individuals become part of regional value chains and inter-regional markets.  Breakthrough technologies for industry which enable raw material and energy consumption to plummet, emissions to fall significantly and raw material and energy independence to increase whilst maintaining constant output.  Flagship Project 10: The aim is to develop innovative Austrian technologies into model solutions for smart, safe and affordable energy and transport systems for the future. In order to stimulate implementation on European domestic markets and to increase the international visibility of Austrian solutions on global markets, large-scale testing of technologies and solutions must take place under real operating conditions.  Development and exemplary application of domestic energy and energy-relevant transport technologies for large-scale practical testing of smart system solutions under real operating conditions.  Strengthening and developing Austria as a leading market for innovative energy technologies and energy-relevant transport technologies as well as technology-based services. Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 102 of 268      ii. available  The immense task of making the decarbonisation agenda technically feasible, economically viable and socially acceptable depends on a long-term research, technology and innovation (RTI) policy.  Alongside #mission2030, which, as already mentioned, sets out a decarbonisation pathway and the BMVIT aims to exploit the economic opportunities of transforming the energy system to promote energy research and innovation as a central pioneer in the gradual decarbonisation of the energy system, thereby enabling Austria to make a significant contribution towards a future with clean, safe and affordable energy.  The further development and future direction of energy research and innovation is characterised by an integrated perspective based on a systemic approach. In addition to technological changes, research will also be carried out into the potential for a socio-ecological transition towards sustainable energy use and the methods of achieving this. In order to allow for long-term decision-making and room for manoeuvre, the following innovation systems, referred to here as research.  Technological development and smart system solutions will aim to generate a corresponding demand for technology on the Austrian and European domestic markets and address the competitiveness of Austrian businesses making products for worldwide export. The adjustment of market and regulatory frameworks and changes in the roles of actors and how they interact are inextricably linked, and require multi-dimensional innovation strategies.     Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 103 of 268  Figure 10: Thematic areas in energy research and innovation in Austria    Source: BMVIT 2050 Energy Research and Innovation Strategy (2017) ENERGIESYSTEM ENERGY SYSTEM Gesellschaftliche Herausforderungen Societal challenges THEMENFELD THEMATIC AREA Energiesysteme und -netze Energy systems and grids Gebäude und urbanes System Buildings and urban system Industrielle Energiesysteme Industrial energy systems Verkehrs- und Mobilitätssystem Transport and mobility system Umwandlungs- und Speichertechnologien Conversion and storage technologies Transpositionsprozesse, soziale Innovationen Transposition processes, social innovations  These priorities are set out in concrete      iii. National objectives on competitiveness, where available  The implementation of a decarbonisation pathway is a long-term process. A technologically open framework needs to be put in place which is tailored to the pathway, is in keeping with European targets and takes account of competition. This applies to all sectors of the economy that impact on current and future jobs in Austria as a business location. Public resources must be used efficiently, effectively and in a targeted manner along the entire decarbonisation pathway and explicit account must be taken of the principle of budgetary sustainability. Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for Austria 104 of 268   Successful implementation of climate targets must parallel international targets in order to ensure a level playing field and maintain the competitiveness of the Austrian economy in general, and its energy-industry. At the same time, outlets for innovations and environmental and climate technologies from Austria to growing export markets must be increased. The objective is to ensure that Austrian businesses will still be able to obtain energy services at economically affordable prices. Comprehensive carbon leakage protection provides an important short- and medium-term basis for the conversion to zero-emission processes by energy-intensive businesses and plants that are highly efficient compared to their international counterparts. The emissions trading system should effectively support full decarbonisation of our energy system by 2050.     