104 3. Policies and measures 3.1. Dimension decarbonisation Federal State The criterion of cost-effectiveness, which underpins the principle of technological neutrality, will be applied in the selection of Policies and Measures (PaMs). In view of its federal powers and its policy of supporting the Regions in achieving their joint climate targets, the Federal State will pursue existing internal policies and measures, implement the measures recommended in the NECP and adopt new measures contributing to the achievement of GHG reduction targets.  If those measures prove impossible or insufficient, the Federal State will propose alternative federal policies and measures with a similar effect to those that could not be implemented. The federal measures will continue to be updated, as far as possible, as part of the NECP assessments. The Federal State will, if possible, quantify its measures in terms of resources and results as part of the biennial assessment of the policies and measures.  3.1.1. GHG emissions and removals x. Policies and measures to achieve the target set under Regulation (EU) 2018/842 as referred in point 2.1.1 and policies and measures to comply with Regulation (EU) 2018/841, covering all key emitting sectors and sectors for the enhancement of removals, with an outlook to the long-term vision and goal to become a low emission economy and achieving a balance between emissions and removals in accordance with the Paris Agreement A. Cross-cutting policies and measures By definition, cross-cutting PaMs cover a wide range of sectors. At national level, all governments are committed to developing new PaMs on the principles set out below. Environmentally friendly taxation Environmentally friendly taxation involves developing a new tax system or new tax instruments to identify price signals that are not compatible with decarbonisation targets and the polluter pays principle. An analysis of environmentally friendly energy taxation will be carried out jointly between the federal and regional governments by 2021. This new system or these new instruments must be consistent with any other tax reforms in order to maintain the international competitiveness of businesses and provide for a policy that supports citizens.  International shipping and aviation -ETS climate objective. Therefore, policy will be organised for the most part at international level. However, Belgium is keen to introduce strategic measures such as promoting energy efficient vessels and shoreside power. In the maritime sector, and in consultation with other Member States, Belgium will explore the introduction of a mechanism to ensure a transition to GHG-free energy at national and international level, as well as the introduction or strengthening of emission standards. To that end, a step-by-step plan is to be developed for shipping in Belgium. In parallel, active cooperation at international level should continue and proposals for measures should be submitted to and supported by the International Maritime Organization (IMO). Similarly, Belgium will urge the aviation industry to make concrete commitments and develop a roadmap to achieve a significant reduction in its GHG emissions. The aim is to internalise the external environmental costs of aviation through tax measures. For example, Belgium could support Europe-wide initiatives to introduce standardised carbon pricing in the aviation sector. 105 sion in financial, budgetary and investment decision-making The necessary public measures can be co-financed by shifting priorities within existing budgets. Belgium is looking at ways of greening the financial system to encourage private funding for the climate transition. It may also be possible, for example, to use stimulus funding to finance the energy and climate transition. Belgium wants to focus more on attracting EU funding in all policy areas relevant to energy and climate policy. Strengthening support for local climate policy Belgium will also focus on practical support and guidance, smart cities, mobilising local energy investments, project co-financing and better communication, as well as on multi-level governance. This will also require the voluntary commitment of local councils to the Covenant of Mayors, a European initiative enabling local and regional authorities to pledge to reduce GHG emissions by more than 20% by 2020 and by more than 40% by 2030. Improving climate governance and optimising the National Climate Commission The various governments will provide and guarantee sufficient resources for all authorities involved in the introduction of the NECP. Strengthening the exemplary role of public authorities in the energy transition By means of sustainable public procurement, public authorities will give the necessary impetus to the market to commit to a decarbonised transition of the economy (by greening their vehicle fleets, purchasing according to the principles of the circular economy, choosing appropriate tender selection criteria, etc.).  Federal State Tax instruments, public finances and financial regulation.  Carbon Pricing: The Belgian National Debate on Carbon Pricing study, published at the end of June 2018 at federal level, consists of exploratory research into carbon pricing options (including a carbon tax). This may be a tax instrument that could give significant impetus to the various non-ETS sectors (including transport, buildings, industry and agriculture). However, additional studies on its practical implementation and feasibility are still required given the division of responsibilities in Belgium and the sharing of the proceeds of such carbon pricing between the Regions and the Federal Government. It goes without saying that, if any shift is to take place, the principle of budget neutrality must be respected. Awareness-raising measures will be planned in the meantime.  VAT: As part of the proposal to reform VAT rates, Belgium will ask the European Commission for a change to the VAT on environmentally friendly investments (cycle tracks, heat pumps, insulation, full renovations, product repair, etc.).  Exemplary role of authorities (see also points 3.2(iii) and 3.1.3(iii)).  Purchase and manage vehicle fleets and building stock in line with climate and energy neutrality objectives by 2040.  Maximise renewable energy generation and use (green electricity, installation of photovoltaic solar panels).  Integrate sustainable development in management contracts.  Set a good example in their purchases (e.g. equipment and materials).  Optimise tender selection criteria (carbon clauses).  Operate authorities digitally, continue the digitalisation of government, rationalise procedures, and introduce one-stop shops and paperless offices.  106 Organisation of the labour market  -authorities and stakeholders. This dialogue will be supported by an analysis of the positive and negative effects of the transition to a climate-neutral society and will be particularly aimed at identifying policy options.  Flemish Region Environmentally friendly taxation In addition to the sectoral tax measures adopted by Flanders and set out elsewhere in this plan, the Flemish Government will urge the Federal Government to implement a number of measures aimed at developing climate-friendly taxation:  extending to the whole country the currently reduced rate of VAT on post-demolition rebuilding of town centres could make a major contribution to the climate neutrality of the building stock;  making the necessary adjustments to company car taxation is vital in order to make the company car fleet emission-free and more environmentally friendly as quickly as possible;  tax incentives for soft mobility and use of modes of transport other than private cars (walking, cycling, public transport);  increasing the tax relief for investments in energy saving measures from 13.5% to a level comparable with the Netherlands. The reform of international aviation and shipping taxation (fuel and/or flight tickets), preferably harmonised at EU level and, if possible, even at global level, could generate new income for the Member States, Belgium and the Regions, which could be used to co-finance the climate transition.  Mitigation of climate change and spatial planning   On 20 Based on the approved strategic vision, a Spatial Policy Plan for Flanders (Beleidsplan Ruimte Vlaanderen  BRV) will be produced in order to shape future spatial policy. The principles and objectives of the programme support the achievement of the Flemish energy and climate objectives. The strategic vision for the BRV provides a comprehensive and ambitious response to demographic, economic, mobility, environmental, natural, biodiversity, climate, energy, raw material and food challenges. The BRV must provide a framework for changing construction so that options for increasing density are created in each municipality and pressure is reduced on open spaces by ensuring a growth rate of 0 ha/day by 2040. It is vital to involve the civil society stakeholders who support and want to help achieve these BRV objectives. This is a task for all Flemings given that the Flemish Government cannot do this alone. It is not only citizens and businesses that need to be convinced, as local authorities are also essential in this transition. In 2020 a series of draft policy frameworks setting out specific actions will be submitted for approval by the Flemish Government so that the initial Spatial Policy Plan for Flanders is approved in 2021 and the policy planning system can effectively begin. Smart use of space A sustainable spatial policy ensures the necessary space for all social functions. focusing on increasing the density of well-located sites through a quality-based approach. New high-quality spatial developments guarantee healthy and attractive living and working conditions. These factors will therefore be taken into account in spatial planning, together with the proximity of transport hubs and facilities, the location of developments in relation to any pollution, and also open spaces and blue-green corridors. 107 Increasing density and focusing on urban development does not mean that only opportunities within the Flemish Diamond or towns and cities can be exploited: rural centres must also be boosted in order to prevent increased fragmentation. Multifunctional and adaptive use (not only in terms of space, but also time) and intertwining of space, functions and buildings, if possible and desirable, will be encouraged without compromising the main use or the needs of the main user. The high-quality transformation of sites with significant development potential will be prioritised (well-located sites that are underused due to their ageing, for example). By increasing density through innovative quality-based approaches, using space in a multifunctional and time-based manner, reusing buildings and taking advantage of underused land, the efficient use of space can be increased and spatial sprawl can be slowed. Improving the quality of the environment in an integrated and innovative manner Good-quality living conditions are important. The 10 fundamental qualities of the BRV are important for all spatial developments. Any development or growth must ensure healthy and attractive living conditions that are designed to facilitate travel, with sufficient access to greenery, water and oases of tranquillity, good air quality, availability of nature and space for food production, and attention to thermal stress. will be designed to give all groups in society access to green spaces, public spaces and basic services. Robust public space Open spaces will be maximised as they are particularly useful for encouraging natural systems, mitigating and adapting to climate change, storing water, and enabling agriculture, leisure and recreation. This multifunctionality will be interwoven as much as possible, but without compromising the main use (for example, large-scale professional agriculture being separated from large areas of vulnerable nature if necessary). In addition to strategic areas for agriculture, nature and water, open spaces will include landscaped areas that are designed and used with multifunctionality in mind. This interweaving of functions within open spaces will play a specific role. The physical system and ecosystem services will structure the functional choices made in open spaces. Robust areas of nature, forest and valley that form the backbone of a wider functional blue-green network extending from the centre of towns and villages will be reinforced. The aim will be to green the built fabric with green roofs, green façades, district gardens and play areas to ensure healthy living conditions that can be adapted to climate change. The growing trend for certain parts of open spaces to be paved will be reversed by reducing the paved area every year.  These principles are important for carbon storage (see the chapter on LULUCF), protecting against the effects of climate change (water management), reducing energy demand in buildings (increased energy efficiency) and curbing transport demand.  Using renewable energy (wind energy) and protecting the landscape from the effects of climate change (space reserved for blue-green corridors) are also important. In addition, they play a role in the modal shift (to public transport and cycling/walking for the movement of people and to inland waterways for freight transport) and managing demand for mobility (proximity of infrastructure). Coherent and dynamic (open) spaces: space for agriculture, forestry, nature and water that is coherently and functionally managed, a dense network of blue-green corridors, and dynamic spatial planning that guarantees food production, biodiversity, soil infiltration and rainwater storage are particularly important for protecting against climate change and for carbon storage.  108 Measures: monitoring and regulation In addition to spatial policy at all levels of government, climate policy and spatial planning measures are envisaged: 1. The Flemish Government has the specific task of implementing a monitoring mechanism for the strategic vision, operational policy, implementation and effects. Through this monitoring, it will be possible to assess whether the contribution of the space to climate change mitigation or adaptation is moving in the right direction and whether this is happening fast enough to make a sufficient contribution to the climate and energy targets in the period 2021-2030. The Spatial Policy Plan of Flanders provides for such a monitoring system. 2. Regulatory barriers, obsolete regulations and administrative obstacles preventing smart and flexible use of the space and innovative ways of living and working will be removed. Projects involving new spatial concepts that increase spatial efficiency and focus on the interweaving of functions, reuse, timed use of space, climate change mitigation and adaptation, and improved mobility and landscape quality will be encouraged. Green and circular economy The climate targets will be met only if we can transition to a green and circular economy.  In a green and circular economy, we can build on our current level of wellbeing and prosperity in the long term, while also preserving our natural capital and a healthy climate. A green and circular economy involves intelligently using the synergies between economy and ecology. In this way we can pursue our economic and environmental goals and also preserve the competitiveness of our economy in the future.   The contribution of the circular economy to climate policy Circular economy is a term that derives from waste and materials policy. Traditional waste policy aimed to process waste in an as environmentally friendly way as possible. Materials policy aims to develop and organise material cycles that can in principle continue to meet our needs indefinitely. Waste becomes new raw materials and products are designed to be recyclable and/or made of recycled materials. However, the circular economy is about more than just recycling: it is also about meeting our needs with fewer resources. To achieve this, products and the systems in which they are applied must be completely re-thought: reuse, demountability for repair and replacement, introduction of product-service combinations, support for other consumption models based on shared use, etc. The climate challenge is not just an energy issue, as we must also focus on the underlying drivers of high energy demand, namely the high consumption of materials that results in a linear economy. Framing the climate challenge as a materials issue, and more broadly as a challenge posed by the linear economy, opens up prospects for finding new solutions to make the economy greener. Figure 7-1 below shows that over half of the GHG emissions of various countries are materials-related, and that is a conservative estimate. For example, residential energy consumption is partly determined by the way in which our homes are built (e.g. insulation) and is therefore also materials-related, or at least partly so. Passenger transport is also for the most part materials-related: in the average trip by car, approximately 100 kg of people are transported by 1.5 tonnes of materials. Lighter vehicles or shared use will therefore have a major impact on the share of passenger transport.  109 Share of materials-related GHG emissions    Materialen: een grote bron van broeikasgassen Materials: a major source of greenhouse gases AANDEEL UITSTOOT PER LAND SHARE OF EMISSIONS BY COUNTRY NIET-MATERIAAL-GERELATEERD NON-MATERIALS-RELATED niet-residenteel energieverbruik non-residential energy consumption residenteel energieverbrurk residential energy consumption personenvervoer passenger transport MATERIAAL-GERELATEERD  MATERIALS-RELATED afvalverwijdering waste disposal voedselproductie en -stockage food production and storage goederentransport goods transport productie goederen en brandstoffen fuel and goods production  Bron: OESO (2012) Greenhouse gas emissions and the potential for mitigation from materials management within OECD countries.  Vlaanderen: ruwe berekening OVAM Source: OECD (2012) Greenhouse gas emissions and the potential for mitigation from materials management within OECD countries.  Flanders: rough calculation by the OVAM Slovenië Slovenia Duitsland Germany Vlaanderen Flanders  Applying circular strategies reduces overall CO2 emissions. This can occur directly (e.g. by preventing transport) or because the strategy requires fewer materials and/or fewer products to meet the same need, thus reducing indirect emissions. therefore lead to fewer products being required to meet a particular need. This results in CO2 savings in terms of the extraction, production, transport and waste treatment of those products avoided. A combination of various circular strategies to meet a particular need (e.g. mobility) can have a far greater effect than the sum of those strategies. This can result in a real system change. In this context, it is also useful to look beyond the CO2 emissions generated in Flanders, because Flemish consumption results in GHG emissions around the world. These can be mapped using footprint indicators, which calculate the global impact of Flemish consumption in terms of GHG emissions (carbon footprint) and materials consumption (material footprint). These footprint indicators provide an insight into where the greatest impacts 110 occur throughout the supply chain. By mapping the emissions in this way, we can avoid proposing solutions that simply shift the problem abroad, because such solutions will not change global emissions. It is therefore useful, in addition to calculating greenhouse gases based on local emissions and setting associated targets, to adopt an approach based on the carbon footprint of Flemish consumption. This footprint largely lies abroad (88%) and is double the local emissions in Flanders. The vast majority stems from housing, passenger transport, food and a wide range of consumer goods, such as textiles, domestic appliances and furniture. The carbon footprint of Flemish consumption stands at 20 tonnes of CO2eq per inhabitant, which is significantly higher than the total GHG emissions within Flanders (around 9 tonnes of CO2eq per inhabitant). Studies estimate that global GHG emissions need to reduce to an average of 2 tonnes per inhabitant by 2050 in order to meet the targets of the Paris Agreement and therefore limit the average global temperature rise to a maximum of 2°C, and subsequently 1.5°C. This means that other more sustainable production and consumption methods need to be found in order to reduce the carbon footprint.  Climate targets must not be solely translated into energy targets, but also into guidance on materials indicating the amount of materials that an economy can consume to achieve a sustainable level of raw materials use. An example of this is the UNEP International Resource Panel report according to which the material footprint should be approximately 7 tonnes per capita in 2050. The material footprint of Flemish consumption was estimated to be 17 tonnes per capita in 2010. Using guidance on materials as a policy guideline is an important step towards achieving a circular economy that no longer destabilises the climate. The aim will be to reduce the material footprint of Flemish consumption by 30% by 2030. The amount of residual household waste will therefore fall from 146 kg per inhabitant to 100 kg per inhabitant by 2030. The aim will also be to reduce the amount of industrial waste by an equivalent percentage by the same date. The contribution of the circular economy to climate policy goes beyond simply reducing GHG emissions. Circularity, in all its aspects, can also help to make society more climate-proof. A circular economy that makes smart use of materials, energy, space, water and food is also a resilient and adaptive economy that is better placed to adapt to external trends in the environment. By focusing on maximising the value of materials and closing (local) cycles, the circular economy offers a robustness that is useful for adapting to climate change.   Objectives for developing a green and circular economy In order to combat climate change, it is therefore important to focus on the following specific objectives. (1) Ensure that products placed on the market last longer, are easier to repair, can be reused, are demountable and recyclable, and/or contain more recycled materials. (2) Encourage businesses to play their role in the transition through production, distribution, activity and consumption models that are adapted in such a way as to ensure that production processes are more environmentally friendly and products remain in a closed cycle for longer, are used more intensively and are more environmentally friendly. (3) Continue to prioritise the best possible selective collection with a view to reuse and recycling. (4) Introduce new indicators and associated guidance, such as the material footprint of consumption, so that potential CO2 savings can be detected and made throughout the supply chain, including outside Flanders. This will require a combination of incentives to create the space for experimentation and sales outlets for green and circular models, together with the right financial, tax and regulatory incentives to steer the market towards the right decisions. A more innovative way of conducting policy based on establishing links and cooperation between target groups and themes will also need to be found.  111  Priority measures for a green and circular economy  Encouraging businesses to participate in the transition New business models A participatory study has shown that businesses recognise the need to transition to appropriate business models, such as product-service combinations, but that there are sticking points and obstacles making them cautious: attachment to existing organisational and governance structures; lack of clarity about potential savings; lock-in effect due to concentration on the main activity; fear of the risk involved in being the first mover, and day-to-day determination of strategy. The policy aims to remove these bottlenecks using new or adapted policy instruments. The transition will have to occur at several levels, such as governance, funding, innovation and behaviour.  We want to encourage businesses to think more broadly when they create added value, and not just to take account of factors such as growth, short-term risk and income in their business model. In this way, businesses, consumers, researchers and authorities will be able to transform the economy together in a more systemic way. We are looking into the possibility of giving some kind of benefit to businesses that score well in the area of corporate social responsibility (CSR) and climate change. This could be achieved through public contracts or improved visibility, for examplerds the more sustainable products and services of businesses that take these steps, for example by encouraging such purchases. After all, consumers have a major impact on the demand side of the economy.   Encouraging circular solutions through public and private contracts We are leading by example as we are introducing circular priority rules in public contracts in order to maximise opportunities for the circular economy. However, private businesses also have significant purchasing power; we are therefore encouraging them to focus on circular purchases and making them accountable, for example by including the circular concept and circular purchases in instruments such as the duty of acceptance and Green Deals.   Using Green Deals to transition to a circular economy The chapter on innovation explains that Green Deals are a generic instrument. Due to their participatory nature, they can play a role in the transition to a green and circular economy and environmentally friendly consumption. Green Deals help to identify sticking points and find solutions (which become new policy) through cooperation between the participating organisations. Experience with the Green Deal for Circular Procurement and the Green Deal for Circular Construction shows that, by working proactively together and forming a learning network, we can play a leading role within the European Union. The Green Deals will benefit from the resources needed to play their role. In particular, a Green Deal is currently being prepared with the distribution and food sector to encourage the prevention of packaging waste.   Development of a symbiosis platform We are developing and supporting a Flemish symbiosis platform for the exchange of information on residual streams and options for reuse as raw materials. This will avoid CO2 emissions and reduce the amount of primary raw materials consumed. We are helping businesses to find the right partner. Initially the platform will focus on the exchange of material streams. In the longer term, it may also be used to exchange residual energy and waste streams and underused space.   Study into the creation of a CO2 backbone network  A CO2 backbone network will be used to temporarily store, transport and use CO2 in order to promote the circular economy of carbon. On the one hand, captured CO2 can be reused in industrial processes, so that the carbon is kept in circulation throughout the value chain. On the other hand, CO2 can be temporarily stored with a view to its permanent underground storage abroad, which is known as carbon capture and storage (CCS). 112   Better policy A policy for a green and circular economy should work to link the various environmental perspectives and themes, such as the climate, waste policy, (renewable) energy, mobility and food. In order to achieve a green economy, as authorities, we must therefore take on a new role and seek to cooperate with the relevant partners. This can be achieved in particular through instruments based on cooperation between authorities and stakeholders, with Green Deals being a typical example.   Implementation of a plan to transition to the circular economy We need to establish a plan for transitioning to the circular economy that will be widely supported and involve a partnership between the main stakeholders (industrial federations, civil society, knowledge institutions, local and federal authorities) and the Flemish Government. As a result, this plan must not only take account of technological innovations, but also the development of appropriate skills, production, management and consumption models, and social inclusion. This partnership must be established so that the OVAM/Vlaanderen Circulair (Circular Flanders hub) can continue to act as a catalyst, connector and innovator. Given the priority that we attach to a circular approach in numerous respects, we will combine the resources of the relevant policy areas and ensure that a sufficiently active role can be given to each policy area in the management of the Vlaanderen Circulair. We will adapt the current governance of the Vlaanderen Circulair so that this broader objective can be achieved. An appropriate legal framework will also be needed. The legislation on waste, products, accountability, intellectual property, purchase and rental of property, licences, producer responsibility and so on is frequently based on the linear economy as the default value. Consequently, the existing legislation is not always helpful to the circular economy, and sometimes even hinders it. We are trying to gradually adapt the legislation so that it better meets the needs of a circular economy, particularly by imposing more requirements in terms of service life, reuse, recyclability and recycled content. We are also working proactively to get the Federal Government and the European Commission to update federal and European legislation. We are in particular using an intra-Belgian circular economy platform, which brings together representatives from the Federal Government and the three Regions to better coordinate legislation and strategy.   Development and roll-out of a circular economy roadmap A circular economy roadmap will be developed with specific objectives for raw material use. It will define how our production and consumption systems in terms of food, housing, mobility and comfort can be circularly organised. It will focus on GHG reduction measures by improving the closure of cycles and better meeting needs with fewer raw materials. It must take account of the limited space available, the symbiosis between industrial players and partners in production and consumption chains, employment policy and investment. This roadmap must clearly focus on prevention, by giving priority to measures higher up in the chain. Both material efficiency and energy efficiency must increase in order to reduce CO2 emissions in production and consumption processes. The circular economy can also be one of the strategic priorities of external economic policy in the areas of trade, investment, research and international partnerships.   Minimising the impact of construction on the climate through circular construction We are encouraging the construction sector to move towards circular and modular buildings. Through the -2010) (Prevention programme for the sustainable management of materials in the construction sector), we are working with relevant partners on a large-scale testbed (including demonstration projects and living laboratories) to promote innovation in construction and demolition technologies. In this context, new funding mechanisms must be developed in order to fairly distribute the costs and benefits of the entire construction process (construction, use and demolition, logistics) so that the reuse of materials and the adaptability of buildings are maximised in the transition to a 113 circular construction economy. The costs and benefits of having smaller demolition sites will also be examined. Together with operators in the construction sector, we are supporting the Green Deal for Circular Construction. To reduce the environmental footprint of buildings, we are taking account of their entire life cycle. We are also focusing on the design of buildings and infrastructure. Using the TOTEM, we are continuing efforts in all three Regions to precisely and jointly determine the physical impact of buildings. The construction sector is seeing a very rapid rise in digital technologies, such as 3D scanning, artificial intelligence and BIM (Building Information Modelling), which we want to use as much as possible. In collaboration with the relevant partners, we are ensuring that data on materials can be easily used in these new technologies to ensure more targeted prevention and repair, and that urban mining supporting a circular construction economy becomes much more efficient in the future.   Encouraging change-oriented construction recommendations on change-oriented construction. These recommendations will enable a building to be adapted to new needs more easily, more quickly and more cheaply, with less waste being generated during the process than currently, or to be dismantled and reused in order to minimise its impact on the climate. Encouraging temporary use of buildings It is important to use buildings, even when they are only temporarily vacant, as this avoids the need for additional buildings to be constructed. This is why we are working on a framework to facilitate the temporary use of buildings.   Environmentally responsible consumption We want to make every possible effort to further improve our quality of life, while considerably reducing our environmental footprint. More and more people want to live in comfort, eat well, travel quickly, relax and so on. In order to develop, those regions with a lower quality of life than ours also need raw materials, etc. The use and processing of raw materials, materials and natural resources that go hand in hand with this lead to increased pressure on the climate, depletion of raw material reserves, harm to nature, pollution and waste generation. In addition to a more sustainable and circular production system, a more sustainable consumption system is also vital in order to turn the tide in this respect. The aim is to environmental impact. The consumption categories that have the most impact on the environment are mobility, housing and food. The impact of consumption on the climate and the environment is calculated using the environmental footprint. If we want to reduce our environmental impact, we also need to reduce and modify our consumption, in addition to implementing technological solutions and ensuring efficiency gains in production. This is also true for indirect emissions, i.e. emissions concealed within the products that we consume, which stem from our consumption patterns. These indirect emissions can form as much as 88% of our total environmental impact. Communicating easy-to-understand and action-oriented measures to encourage environmentally responsible consumption is a priority, including within the framework of European initiatives such as the PEF (Product Environmental Footprint), which will enable Flemish people to take this into account in their purchases. Meat consumption in Belgium fell by 22% between 2005 and 2016, i.e. an average reduction of 1.3 kg per inhabitant per year. In general, surveys show that people are ready to consume more environmentally friendly products, but this does not always lead in practice to responsible purchasing behaviour.  Habits, inadequate supply and other factors also influence consumption behaviour. We want to work on this discrepancy between readiness and actual behaviour by gaining as much insight as possible into consumption behaviour. By focusing on alternative consumption patterns, reduced consumption and reconsumption, we will be able to move towards more environmentally responsible consumption patterns. We must achieve environmentally responsible consumption patterns that remain within the limits of the  and that take account of the social and economic impact of purchasing, using and 114 scrapping products and services. This means consumers no longer buying, or buying less of, certain products/services. It also means replacing (in a timely fashion) certain products/services with (more) environmentally responsible alternatives that can also be reused or repaired more. Other forms of consumption, such as sharing and replacing products with services, must also become commonplace. This trend will form part of the broader product cycle, in which closing cycles is the norm.   General consumption measures Among those consumption categories with the most impact, significant efforts are already being made in the areas of mobility, buildings and energy. However, more remains to be done in the area of food.  In order to move towards more environmentally responsible consumption patterns, we are taking the following initiatives:   Green Deals We are setting up Green Deals for environmentally responsible consumption.   Education and training We are ensuring that an understanding of environmentally responsible consumption and healthy eating is at the heart of relevant training, particularly for general practitioners and dietitians, and we are including these aspects in educational curricula.   Food policy measures   Food policy We are developing a coherent food policy that takes account of ecological, economic, social and health aspects and that is focused on making our diet more sustainable. Awareness-raising initiatives emphasising sustainable diets, based on the food pyramid, are also being implemented. The aim is to ensure that local products are appropriately consumed.   Protein transition In the summer of 2019, the protein transition steering committee was set up within the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, with representatives from ILVO (Flanders Research Institute for agriculture, fisheries and food), with the aim of promoting a protein transition in the broad sense in both feed and food. This group is focusing on policies, research and cooperation with stakeholders, and has the following tasks, among others:  ensure the sustainability of protein sources in feed, in accordance with the action plan for alternative proteins and in cooperation with the Belgian Feed Association (BFA);  continue to ensure the sustainability of conventional animal production;  continue to focus on plant proteins from protein crops;  support the development of alternative sources of plant and animal proteins, particularly through the strategic platform for insects, algae, etc.;  support new markets for the entire chain, from production to waste. In this context, we are researching and developing a Flemish protein transition, specifically for human consumption, from animal sources to plant sources in line with the food pyramid recommendations of the Flemish Institute for Healthy Living (Vlaams Instituut Gezond Leven/Institut flamand de la vie saine).   Reduction of food waste from producer to consumer In Flanders, total waste food streams are estimated at 3.5 million tonnes per year (2015). These involve both edible food waste and inedible by-product streams. Three quarters (74%) of waste food streams are unavoidable by-product streams. In 2015, only one quarter (26%) of waste food streams were food waste. The Flemish agro-food industry (agriculture + food industry) accounts for 80% of waste food streams and 61% of food waste. 115 Depending on the circumstances, by-product streams can be recovered for feed, industry, composting and renewable energy. 92% of streams are currently recovered for feed, compost and energy. Agriculture and the food industry score highly in terms of recovery (7.9 and 8.8 out of 10 respectively in the cascade index). Recovering waste food streams as feed for animals or soil improvers is therefore intrinsically linked with their commercial management. Flemish consumers throw away on average between 18 kg and 26 kg of food per year, which equates to 4% to 6% of total food purchases and approximately 4% of the carbon footprint of purchased food. The government and the entire supply chain are working together on this issue and have implemented a supply chain roadmap, which covers the period from 2015 to 2020 and aims to reduce food waste in Flanders by 15%. A good mix of awareness-raising and behaviour change, technological and social innovation (reorganisation) and new economic models is needed for this purpose. An interim report (2019) indicated the efficiency with which the agro-food chain processed food raw materials in 2017. Preparations are currently being made within the Ketenplatform Voedselverlies/Plateforme gaspillage alimentaire (Food Waste Platform) to produce a document that will replace the food chain roadmap. The OVAM, Environment Department, ASF Department and AP Department are working together on this document. This  provisional title of Voedsel en biomassa circulair 2021-2025/Alimentation et biomasse circulaires 2021-2025 (Circular food and biomass 2021-2025). In addition to the prevention plan, the action programme will also include a successor to the 5-2020 Biomassareststromenplan/Plan de flux résiduels de biomasse (Biomass waste streams plan).    Developing distribution platforms for surplus food and food platforms to combat food waste We are encouraging the development of a network of distribution platforms and food platforms. The distribution platforms will manage surplus food supply and demand in a given region and organise the logistics of these streams. The food platforms will transform surplus food into new food products and then distribute these.   Working towards an environmentally responsible Flemish Government   Analysis The climate transition will require everyone in all sectors of society to make a major effort. A credible policy and stable support are therefore vital. In this context, the Flemish Government must play an exemplary role and achieve just as much in its internal management as the target groups that form the focus of its policy. In terms of its own energy and fuel consumption and associated CO2 emissions, the Flemish Government approved the Climate Plan of the Flemish Government in 2016. This plan sets out its targets for improving the energy efficiency of its buildings and technical installations, with a 27% reduction in primary energy and a 40% reduction in CO2 emissions due to energy consumption in its buildings and technical infrastructure and due to the fuel consumption of its official vehicles. These targets apply to both the Flemish Government as a whole and to each specific entity. Four action plans are in place to the end of 2020 to help achieve these targets. Due to increased ambitions at the European, Belgian and Flemish levels, this Climate Plan of the Flemish Government needs to be revised. Furthermore, recent changes in consumption and new projections indicate that it is realistic to significantly increase the level of ambition in terms of CO2 emissions. At the same time, the Flemish Government can also influence the indirect emissions that stem from its activities. Through a sound purchasing policy, it can use its purchasing power to encourage other players in the value chain to reduce their material footprint and energy and fuel consumption.   Targets By revising the Climate Plan of the Flemish Government, the level of ambition will be raised and the scope extended. The following overarching targets will be set for the Flemish Government for the period up to 31 December 2030 (compared with the baseline year 2015): 116  CO2 emissions from buildings and technical installations: 40% reduction compared with 2015;  CO2 emissions from the fuel consumption of official vehicles: 40% reduction in by 2030 compared with 2005;  primary energy consumption as a result of energy consumption in buildings and technical infrastructure: 2.5% reduction on average from 2020. In 2019, the scope will include 75 entities forming part of the Flemish Government.   Measures Development of long-term property strategies in order to achieve CO2 neutrality A long-term vision extending beyond the 2030 target is vital for renovating the building stock and rationalising technical installations. All entities in the Flemish Government will be helped to analyse their buildings and produce a master plan aimed at achieving carbon neutrality before 2050. This long-term vision will also take into  and management in a broader context (grouping with other entities, cooperation with private operators, etc.). Action plan for renovating the building stock Each entity must meet the set targets, for which purpose it can use a range of support measures (potential scans, framework for concluding energy performance contracts, visualisation of energy data and their linking with property data, benchmarking, project subsidies, etc.). The change in consumption of each individual entity will be monitored and reported on an annual basis. Reduction in the work of entities by centralising the management of office buildings and vehicle fleets The property of the various entities will be taken over by the Agence de Gestion des Infrastructures (Infrastructure Management Agency), which will be responsible for managing the buildings. The work of the various entities will therefore be reduced so that they can focus on their core purpose. By developing and centralising the necessary expertise, the Agence de Gestion des Infrastructures can tackle the climate targets more effectively. Management of the vehicle fleets of all entities covered by the Climate Plan of the Flemish Government will also be centralised and entrusted to a common service provider, which will ensure more reliable and constant monitoring of data and stricter application of the directives issued. Both for the vehicle fleets and for the buildings and technical installations, the consumption figures will be kept up to date in central databases, enabling constant monitoring, visualisation of changes and benchmarking. Action plan for mobility At the end of 2018, the Flemish Government decided to purchase no more new official cars with traditional petrol or diesel engines from 2021. As a result, from 2021, it will purchase or lease only fully electric vehicles (BEV and FCEV) or plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) with CO2 emissions not exceeding 50 g/km, and CNG passenger cars. Measures will also be taken to minimise the use of petrol/diesel in plug-in hybrid electric vehicles and CNG cars. Charging of PHEVs will therefore be encouraged, with the electricity consumption being monitored and incentive measures being introduced, if necessary, to increase this charging. With regard to CNG, fuel card use will be monitored. From 2025, the Flemish Government will purchase or lease only zero-emission passenger cars (BEV or FCEV). Green solutions will also be maximised when purchasing or leasing other categories of vehicle. For example, similar ambitions will be set for vans two years after passenger cars (i.e. from 2023, only BEV, FCEV, PHEV and CNG vans and, from 2027, only BEV and FCEV vans). As regards lorries, this will depend on market developments. In addition to purchase and leasing agreements for environmentally friendly vehicles, the Flemish Government will work on the following aspects: roll-out of the charging infrastructure needed; actions aimed at changing user behaviour; limited financial incentives; reduction in the work of entities; cycling infrastructure; mobility studies; option to propose framework contracts for environmentally friendly vehicles, etc. The most polluting vehicles will also be removed as far as possible. 117 Other measures will constantly be taken outside this scope (e.g. making commuter traffic more sustainable), but without the reduction in CO2 emissions being monitored. Environmentally responsible public contracts The Flemish Government is committed to environmentally responsible and circular public contracts and will therefore include specific requirements and criteria imposing or encouraging environmentally responsible and circular solutions in tender documents. By also proposing environmentally responsible and circular framework agreements, the entities of the Flemish Government can reduce the environmental impact of their purchases with very little administrative work. The Flemish Government will test the CO2 performance scale in a number of pilot projects and, if this proves successful, will apply it in projects where this is useful and feasible. This measure should reduce CO2 emissions from large projects. Many players are involved in public contracts (local authorities, health sector, education sector, etc.). However, their expertise in environmentally responsible and circular public contracts is still very limited. As the central authority, the Flemish Government also wants to play a leading role in this respect and continue to disseminate knowledge, information and good examples to support these other public players. Measures will be formulated and monitored in line with the agreements under the Flemish Plan on Public Contracts.  Climate and local authorities Towns, cities and municipalities have a wealth of powers to support the energy transition at its root. Nearly 90% of Flemish towns, cities and municipalities have already made commitments under the Covenant of Mayors 2020-2030 and taken numerous initiatives. There are many interfaces between these local initiatives and the regional targets, measures and actions (e.g. with regard to the long-term renovation strategy, development of green electricity, district heating systems, transition to sustainable heating of buildings, energy poverty, etc.). These local arenas are clearly keen to improve cooperation with the regional level. The Flemish Government will therefore continue to encourage local authorities in Flanders to work together to achieve the 2030 target of the Covenant of Mayors. In particular, it will support local authorities in their work to reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions within their area, and to increase renewable energy generation. It will provide practical support with the development and, in particular, the implementation of their climate and energy plans. These initiatives not only concern the mitigation policy, but will also support the climate adaptation policy at local level. Supporting local environment and energy plans There is a lot of demand within local authorities for an integrated framework for developing and implementing climate measures. In cooperation with local authorities, some joint actions will be researched in order to best meet this demand. Furthermore, as part of the Covenant of Mayors, tools for developing climate mitigation and adaptation measures will also be proposed. In cooperation with local authorities, these tools will be evaluated in due course and adapted to new requirements.  Good tools need correct data to be inputted. For transport emissions, the traffic data used are still very uncertain. Better local traffic data is therefore needed. The Flemish Government wants to encourage local authorities to count traffic on their roads themselves by installing inductive-loop traffic detectors and sending the results to the Flemish Government (Vlaams Verkeerscentrum/Flemish traffic management centre). It is important that traffic data are collected in an accurate and uniform manner and that measurements are recorded over a long enough period of time. To that end, the Flemish Government will produce a framework contract for municipalities to sign. We are currently studying the possibility of financially supporting the municipalities. Big data, sensor technology and the Internet of Things are increasingly available in towns and cities, and represent new instruments in the transition to a climate-neutral society. The Flemish Government is taking the lead in this transition through pilot projects and cooperation with universities and centres of expertise. We are 118 very interested in the interface between transport, energy and digital technology, with a specific focus on innovative infrastructure solutions (such as smart grids, energy storage, e-mobility, charging infrastructure and alternative fuels). As regards data delivery, efforts are being made to provide as much data as possible to local authorities so that they can pursue a policy based on facts. A renewed partnership with local authorities Our towns, cities and municipalities have a key role to play in Flemish energy and climate policy. As the most visible level of authority, they play an important exemplary role with regard to their inhabitants and businesses. They translate the targets, actions and measures of regional policy into the day-to-day lives of citizens and are the best placed to develop local support and ensure the energy and climate transition at its root. For that reason, the Flemish Government wants to continue supporting local authorities and involve them more closely in the development of energy and climate policy. We will therefore work together to conclude an Energy and Climate Pact between the Flemish Government, towns, cities and municipalities, and the Vereniging van Vlaamse Steden en Gemeenten/Association des villes et communes flamandes (Association of Flemish Towns, Cities and Municipalities). This pact will lay the foundations for structural cooperation and, through mutual undertakings, will ensure a vigorous local energy and climate policy. The Flemish Interior Minister will discuss the following topics with local authorities: local climate tables, local demolition policy plans and local demolition funds.  Increasing support for a climate-neutral society  Analysis and objectives At the moment, the debate surrounding climate policy is often highly polarised. For some people, this policy is not sufficiently proactive. Others feel threatened and are afraid that climate policy will cost them dear or affect how they live. In such a context, achieving the climate transition and meeting the ambitious policy objectives set will therefore require the close involvement of all stakeholders. Cooperation between citizens and civil society, politics and administration, entrepreneurs and knowledge centres is vital. Many say that they are ready to get involved, but we will only have the necessary support if everyone is involved.  In order to consolidate and broaden support among the population, the Flemish Government wants to utilise the knowledge resulting from behavioural science. The obstacles that prevent people making environmentally responsible choices will be identified, studied and eliminated, and levers will be further developed. This will allow a coherent policy to be developed that effectively involves and engages citizens in this issue. The key elements of this policy include producing and communicating a clear and enthusiastic vision of the future that encompasses reducing GHG emissions and improving of living standards.  The population must be informed how the current and future (policy) initiatives of the public authorities, businesses and organisations will gradually achieve this.  It must be clearly explained to the population how they can specifically contribute to the energy and climate transition.  Nudging. Measures In order to involve and engage the population, close cooperation will be established with the relevant players in society, such as businesses, civil society, the education sector, local authorities, grassroots movements and the academic world. In this way, the various roles can be assumed by the appropriate political level. The Flemish Government will play its role through the following initiatives.  position/attitude on the climate transition and their actual behaviour (based on existing research). Also, if necessary, improve our understanding of this subject through new methods. 119  Acquire the necessary know-how in terms of communicating the climate issue to target groups and pass on that know-how to the various segments of society. We will use that know-how to develop an attractive vision of the future in Flanders that works for the largest number of people possible because it addresses various segments of the population (age, socioeconomic environment, etc.) and illustrates (their contribution to) the transition over various timescales.  Help social and administrative players to inform the population about the climate challenge, increase vital support for the climate transition and encourage the necessary changes in behaviour. In order for people to better understand and tackle the challenges of climate change, its causes and possible consequences, change strategies and their complexity, it is vital that the education and training sector commits just as positively to this work. programme, Ecocampus programme and NME programme). Climate education is already being encouraged, in close dialogue with the Working group on climate and education. We want to actively engage in climate education through a targeted approach tailored to the various target groups (primary, secondary and higher education, and nature and environment learning centres in Flanders). In this context, we will use the current knowledge of the requirements that have been identified, particularly within the Working group on climate and education. We therefore propose the following three-pronged approach.  In the short term, significantly increase the focus on and expertise in climate education by developing a tailored offer for primary, secondary and higher education, and for nature and environment learning centres. Through temporary secondments (every year for a period of five years), some teachers from primary, secondary and higher education, and from nature and environment learning centres will develop a tailored support offer in close cooperation with the target group.  We want to respect educational goals as much as possible and, in conjunction with the policy area, determine how to most effectively tackle climate education at various levels and in various directions. We want to fund action research to ensure that climate education continues to be successfully delivered in compulsory education and in nature and environment learning centres in higher education, and is also broadened and integrated, for example, in the training of teachers.  In higher education, we will focus on support for educational innovation and integration of the climate in curricula through targeted calls for projects. In this context, we will make use of recent positive experiments conducted in climate-focused living labs.  Increasing and spreading capacity and knowledge An effective energy and climate administration ensures that implementation and reporting are coordinated by establishing a framework of clear agreements setting out the role of the various departments and entities. Climate policy transcends policy areas, which is why all policy areas must help to achieve the climate targets by using their own expertise. As regards knowledge building, we will continue to aim for a high level of expertise on climate policy among all the entities involved. This knowledge building is not only based on studies and research but also, to a large extent, on lessons learnt from the initiatives and experiments of pioneers and innovators in all sectors of society. Given the new challenges, the focus will be on the following topics. - Innovation: knowledge of how existing instruments are used at the Flemish and European levels, knowledge of developments at the international level and applicability at the Flemish level. - Cross-cutting: knowledge of how spatial planning instruments are used to achieve energy and climate targets, knowledge of new ways of involving and engaging the population, knowledge of how to mobilise private 120 funding for the climate transition and to make the financial sector more sustainable, knowledge of the transition to an environmentally responsible tax system, knowledge of indirect emissions and ways in which the Flemish carbon footprint can be reduced and monitored. - Transition and systemic change: knowledge will be developed for each of the sectors. - Simulation models and long-term models: overall, there is a need to continue using and improving existing simulation models and to develop additional and complementary long-term models (techno-economic models, electricity models, etc.). New methods must be used to (better) model aspects such as uncertainty, actual behaviour in imperfect markets and interaction between different elements of the energy system. For this purpose, we want to develop and use a series of complementary models. To better support Flemish energy and climate policy (e.g. in terms of data management, support for measures, potential cost studies, social and other impact analyses, and ex ante and ex post policy assessments), an inventory of the information available to support policies, shortcomings in terms of coordination and any missing information will be produced. Proposals will be made to ensure the best possible justification of energy and climate policy and the necessary scientific support in Flanders.  Walloon Region Spatial planning The Regional Development Plan (Schéma de Développement du Territoire  SDT) (49) identifies the climate and energy as two of the ten challenges to be tackled in terms of spatial planning. key regional levers. Through the SDT, the Walloon Government plans to organise the urban areas into a network and develop new ways of organising the economy, such as the local economy and the circular economy. The aim is to transform how the region and links between functions, activities and resources are understood. The SDT identifies 20 ambitious objectives for 2030 and 2050, all of which will help across the board to combat global warming, increase energy efficiency and improve air quality. The SDT, which forms a guideline for Walloon regional planning policy, will steer the key spatial planning decisions while ensuring respect for the four priorities of the Regional Development Code, which are: - prevention of urban sprawl and rational use of land and resources; - socioeconomic development and attractiveness of the region; - qualitative management of living conditions; - management of mobility. The options identified by the SDT may be further developed within spatial planning tools produced at local and supra-local level. However, these tools cannot disregard the objectives set by the plan. The draft SDT proposes a series of strong measures, including the following, aimed at preserving regional wealth and better protecting its environment. - Reduce the consumption of undeveloped land to 6 km²/year by 2030, i.e. half of the area currently consumed, with a goal of 0 km²/year by 2050. - By 2030, construct 50% of new housing in the centre of towns and villages, with a goal of 75% by 2050. - By 2030, develop 30% of new areas of economic activity on previously developed land, in particular by restoring wasteland, or in areas already earmarked by planning tools, with a goal of 100% by 2050. Aim for a higher occupation density of areas intended for economic activity with a land occupation factor of between 50% and 70%, excluding areas that cannot be used such as boundaries, fencing and environmental compensation areas. In accordance with the regional business development plan,                                                            49 http://lampspw.wallonie.be/dgo4/tinymvc/apps/amenagement/views/documents/amenagement/regional/sdt/projet-sdt-FR.pdf 121 authorise business complexes with a net commercial area of more than 2,500 m² only in urban centres rather than on the periphery, unless it can be proven that a complex on the periphery will not harm nearby urban centres. - Create private green spaces (to be transferred to the public authorities where applicable) at a rate of at least 10% of the area of all urban development projects of more than 2 ha. - Create around 100 modal interchange facilities or hubs by 2030 and cover the entire region by 2050. - Repurpose 100 ha of redevelopment sites every year by 2030. - Increase the modal share of public and shared transport (in vehicle-kilometres), This was 13% in 2017 and should be around 25% by 2030 and 50% by 2050. - Increase the modal share of cycling (in vehicle-kilometres), This was 1% in 2017 and should be around 5% by 2030 and 10% by 2050. - Reduce the modal share of private cars (in vehicle-kilometres), This was 83% in 2017 and should be around 60% by 2030 and 40% by 2050. - Create 1,000 km of safe cycle paths by 2030 and 2,000 km by 2050. - Increase the average number of people per vehicle from 1.3 in 2017 to 1.8 in 2030 and 3 in 2050. These last five points are detailed in the chapter on mobility.  Encouragement of behaviour to reduce GHG emissions The success of climate change campaigns depends on several factors, including the receptiveness of the population. For example, the public will not necessarily utilise available aid or adapt their behaviour in the short term only. The blind use of education and awareness-raising campaigns, or short-term financial incentives, will not result in long-term behaviour change. Integrated socio-community marketing approaches (community initiatives able to promote behaviour change) offer great potential in terms of encouraging responsible behaviour (50) and must therefore be envisaged. Such behaviour campaigns can target certain flagship topics, such as environmentally conscious consumption, energy saving behaviour in the home, mobility or even digital pollution, which is a form of hidden energy consumption that is often neglected (51), even though the electricity consumption of data centres is expected to increase in the coming years. Several awareness-raising or behaviour change platforms, actions and campaigns have been established at institutional level (52), supplemented by a wealth of other structures (53). To ensure rapid access to information on virtuous behaviour, the Walloon Region will ensure that existing platforms, actions and campaigns are integrated so that everyone can quickly and easily find the information they need and the answers to their questions. These approaches must be made possible by rationalising and optimising existing tools in cooperation with, and with the support of, operators in the sector who must be able to deliver the required information through their actions.                                                             50 https://www.seai.ie/publications/Changing-Energy-Behaviour.-What-Works..pdf  51 In 2016, data centres in Wallonia accounted for 7.7% of the total electricity consumption of the service sector.  52 Guichets Energie (e-etc. 53 challenges. 122 Brussels Capital Region Cross-cutting approach: integration of climate objectives in other regional policies Integration of climate priorities in regional decisions The government wants an ambitious response to the European goals and to the commitments made under the Paris Agreement, by developing a fair and proactive climate policy. To that end, it will develop a systemic, structural and structured approach. All regional levers will be mobilised to establish a new climate governance and to ensure that these challenges (and those linked to biodiversity) lead to regional decisions. As an example, from the start of the parliamentary term, the government will include a contribution to climate priorities in the guidance notes and letters of each minister and each public body, and also in the goals assigned to senior officials.  Development of a low-carbon vision for Brussels to 2050 Given the challenges and opportunities involved in these efforts in such a dense and urbanised area, the government undertakes to move towards the European carbon neutrality target by 2050. To achieve this target, the government intends to equip the region with a long-term strategy based on binding  This challenge can only be solved if the people of Brussels share a vision. The government will therefore initiate a public debate, bringing together Brussels residents, economic, social and institutional operators, transition initiatives and local authori- The terms of this debate will be decided in 2020.  Adaptation to climate change Although the climate change mitigation measures in this plan will limit the regional contribution to climate change, they will not be sufficient to avoid its current and future consequences. As a result, adaptation measures will be needed to mitigate the damage caused by the inevitable impact. In addition to the measures included in the adaptation priority of the Regional Air, Climate and Energy Plan, the government will therefore produce a regional adaptation strategy anticipating the consequences of climate change and its resulting environmental, economic and social risks.  Scientific support for the climate strategy The government will base its action, particularly in terms of the climate, on scientific expertise. An independent interdisciplinary evaluation committee, consisting of scientific experts, will therefore be set up within the Environmental Council and will be responsible for annually submitting a report to Parliament on the state of public policies with regard to the climate strategy and regional biodiversity.  An integrated regional development and environment policy to tackle the climate challenge Spatial planning and urban development are vital components and tools in the construction of Brussels society. They define how Brussels residents live, work, travel, learn or play in the city. Given the population growth in the Brussels Capital Region, the government has opted for a smart spatial development strategy making targeted choices to allow an increase in both urban density and green areas, sustainable social interactions and the creation of high-quality public spaces. The Brussels Capital Region will therefore roll out a sustainable regional development strategy in line with the ambitions of the Regional Sustainable Development Plan (Plan régional de développement durable  PRDD), i.e. a polycentric city with local communities at district level. In particular, the regional development policy will aim 123 to improve the living conditions and attractiveness of the densest central districts by creating green spaces and oases of coolness, reducing the built area and increasing district facilities. The cross-cutting planning tools that guide regional policy will therefore be adapted, if necessary. The  PRAS) is a key document in the rdevelopment. Given that it is binding and creates rights, its amendment is a substantial, costly and complex process. An inadequately assessed amendment could have major uncontrolled consequences on both regional development and the achievement of regional objectives (creation of housing and the associated living environment, preservation of heritage, attractiveness and economic performance, balanced mobility, and public engagement in the r The PRAS will therefore be updated in response to the changes in the Brussels Capital Region and the new PRDD. Such an amendment will enable the PRAS to be adapted to the challenges in Brussels and will necessarily include the climate ambitions. It should also clarify the balance between functions in mixed areas, incorporate the objectives of the Good Move regional mobility plan, protect sites of high biological value that make a specific contribution to the green network, and offer a framework for urban agriculture. The legal feasibility of including areas where the density is to be increased or reduced will also be assessed. Furthermore, 10 priority development hubs have been identified by the government and are in the process of being set up. Further to Action 105 of the Regional Air, Climate and Energy Plan, which has a zero-carbon target for any new urban development, and based on sufficient diagnoses and knowledge (initial phase), these hubs will be planned (planning phase) and set up (operational and subsequent phases) in line with the regional ambitions and climate targets. To ensure that this approach adds real value and proves to be effective, the climate impact focus in the regional planning of the priority development hubs must be forward looking and aim to research and validate proposals so that the relevant expertise is gradually developed within perspective.brussels and the best possible compromise is achieved between the climate ambitions, resources used and other regional objectives. To help achieve the climate targets and regional ambitions, and to guarantee their legal stability, the government will take the following steps. - Update the PRAS in order to include the multi-criteria climate targets in the general objectives and in the  ZEMU), areas with (significant) mixed functions, areas of regional interest ( ZIR), areas of regional interest for deferred development (à aménagement différé  ZIRAD), housing areas, and requirements 21 to 28. For this purpose, a working group will be set up in early 2020 to bring together the various authorities involved (Perspectives, Bruxelles Environnement, Urban.Brussels, Bruxelles Mobilité). Prior analyses and studies will be begun during 2020 and the amended PRAS will be adopted in 2024. - Plan climate-compatible priority development hubs. Sustainability objectives (including circular economy aspects) will be included from 2020 in all regional diagnoses (criteria and a framework will be defined for this purpose), and from 2025 in all hub planning documents. A comprehensive review will be conducted in 2025. These two actions will be carried out together with the various competent bodies (Perspectives, Bruxelles Envir The Regional Planning Regulation (Règlement ré RRU) is also an important tool in the rng aspects in particular: (i) characteristics of structures and their surroundings; (ii) housing standards; (iii) construction sites; (iv) accessibility of buildings for people with reduced mobility; (v) advertising and signage; (vi) the road network, its accesses and surroundings, and (vii) parking rules away from public roads. The current RRU has been in force since 2006. However, a draft revised RRU was adopted by the previous government. The public inquiry into this draft was held from 14 March to 13 April 2019. 124 The government will complete the revision of the RRU, with the following objectives being maintained and/or reinforced: - the principle of contextualising authorised dimensions; - increase in the size of public spaces in response to changing ways of living; - improvement in pedestrian and cyclist comfort; - a new definition of A, B and C accessibility areas taking into account changes in the public transport offer; - variation in the number of authorised parking spaces depending on the location of a project; - new proactive provisions on bicycle parking spaces and delivery areas;  Economic innovation to aid the transition A dynamic and innovative region in economic, environmental and social terms is vital for holding onto its driving forces and attracting the talent of the future. To achieve the objective of a regulated and decarbonised market economy, the region will treat economic operators as preferred partners. Each sector will therefore be encouraged to contribute to the collective objectives resulting from the NECP. In agreement with the social partners and building on the existing impetus, economic support tools (regulations, funding, assistance, human resources allocated within organisations, promotion abroad, economic research, etc.) will therefore be gradually steered towards support for the transition of all businesses and sectors to decarbonised production models, the circular and regenerative economy, social and democratic entrepreneurship, and digitisation of the economy. The g only the best economic models in social and environmental terms will continue to benefit from regional public support. As an extension of the Strategy 2025, the government will therefore develop a transition strategy for the Brussels economy to 2030, which will promote the decarbonisation of all sectors and reinforce support for the sectors of the circular economy (see point 1.1.2.2.2 on this subject), social economy and digital economy. Particular attention and support will be given to training in the resulting new trades and skills.  Sustainable renovation strategy and economy To achieve the medium- and long-term climate targets (2030 and 2050), and also to reduce the overall cost of housing in Brussels and improve its quality, the sustainable renovation of buildings is a key issue in the environmental transition. It is also an opportunity to create businesses and jobs that cannot be easily relocated, which the government must seize by supporting training, guaranteeing high-quality jobs and preventing social dumping. -Environment--Environnement-within which all sectoral stakeholders will work to implement the Strategy for the sustainable renovation of Brussels buildings (Stratégie de rénovation durable du bâti bruxellois). The government will also involve public and private sponsors in the Alliance so that all possible options are available for funding the transition of buildings. The Alliance will work to stimulate demand for the renovation of buildings (by adopting support and information measures, tightening standards, public authorities setting an example, etc.), build the capacity of operators in the energy renovation sector (by supporting businesses, supporting innovation, etc.) and develop the necessary skills (by improving the vocational training offer, providing specific support to jobseekers, etc.). Sustainable construction is an economic sector with the goal of achieving the rwhile locating as many jobs and as much economic activity as possible in Brussels. The region already has recognised experience, pioneers and public policies in eco-construction. The government intends to pursue this 125 policy by developing circular construction and locating as many jobs and as much economic activity as possible in this sector in Brussels.  Regional digital sobriety strategy (54) Digital technology is nowadays inescapable as connected objects are steadily becoming part of all aspects of our lives (housing, cars, communication, etc.). The digital transition and smart cities can in particular be regarded as ways of reducing energy consumption in many sectors (IT for Green). However, the direct and indirect environmental impacts of increasing use of digital technology are often underestimated, partly due to the  The energy efficiency of digital technologies has significantly improved. However, the broad global trends in all sectors are painting an alarming picture. New technologies account for 4% of annual global CO2 emissions, i.e. just as much as aviation (55). This source of emissions therefore needs to be urgently included in the overall emissions reduction goal in order to limit its impact on climate change. Digitisation also needs to be refocused on one of its key objectives: reducing the environmental impact of activities (reducing travel, printing, etc.). The explosion in the environmental impact of digital technology can and must be prevented  A sober digital transition does not just involve reducing the direct energy consumption of digital activities, purchasing more energy-efficient and more sustainable equipment (Green for IT), changing equipment less often or reducing superfluous energy-intensive uses. Reducing the energy and environmental footprint of digital technology also involves using our individual and collective capacity to question the rationality of our purchasing and consumption behaviour in terms of digital objects and services, and adapting it accordingly. It equally involves efficiently managing digital tools at the end of their life (smartphones, computers, data centres, etc.). It is also vital to raise awareness of the existence and nature of the behind-the-scenes aspects of digital services: - upstream: consumption of rare earths and water, and environmental and social damage in extracting countries; significant use of grey energy; - during use: energy consumption, surface area occupied (56); - downstream: electronic waste, environmental and social damage in the countries affected by landfill activity and recycling. The region has a role to play among digital consumers, whether individuals, businesses/organisations or public authorities. It must also reduce the impact of its own digital needs or activities. For this purpose, a digital sobriety strategy tackling the various aspects mentioned above will be studied.                                                            54 Sources: - émissions de gaz à effet de serre: https://www.ademe.fr/technologies-numeriques-information-communication-tnic-guide-sectoriel-2012  - Cécile Diguet and Fanny Lopez (eds), , Rapport Ademe, 2019: https://www.ademe.fr/impact-spatial-energetique-data-centers-territoires-l  - The Shift Project, Lean ICT  pour une sobriété numérique 2018: https://theshiftproject.org/article/pour-une-sobriete-numerique-rapport-shift/  - IDDRI, FING, WWF France, GreenIT.fr (2018), White Paper on the Digital Economy and the Environment: https://www.iddri.org/en/publications-and-events/report/white-paper-digital-economy-and-environment  - Policy paper, Greening government ICT strategy: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/greening-government-ict-strategy  - Action Plan for Green IT in Denmark: https://www.apc.org/sites/default/files/Action_Plan_for_Green_IT_in_Denmark.pdf  55 Source: Green IT Belgium. 56 In France, old buildings have been renovated into data centres. 126 The Walloon Government will therefore: - reduce the environmental and climate impact of regional digital tools and services in their design and use and at the end of their life (in the context of a circular economy); - inform, alert and educate the Brussels population (individuals, businesses, etc.) about the impact of digital technology and the development of tools; - reduce the consumption of regional data centres (existing or to be built), including taking advantage of opportunities for heat recovery. The public authorities will set an example by: - implementing a regional digital equipment strategy, including digital purchases and services (Green for IT); - developing digital innovation pilot projects; - implementing a circular economy approach for end-of-life regional digital tools; - studying the feasibility of extending the guarantee period of digital equipment. This strategy will also take account of climate change impacts that have already occurred in order to develop adaptations. In terms of cooperation with the other entities, the government will: - ask the Federal Government to:  continue reviewing planned obsolescence and finish drafting a regulation in this respect;  footprint, service life, repairability, availability of spare parts).  Measures in relation to indirect emissions Aware of the need to reduce its total carbon footprint, and not just its direct emissions, the Brussels Capital Region has set itself the goal of also working on its indirect emissions. In addition to energy, the manufacture of goods and production of food consumed in the region must therefore also be considered.  Data Indirect GHG emissions are real, but most measurement and reporting efforts are currently focused on direct emissions given the international rules and undertakings in this respect. However, knowing the rcarbon footprint will in the long term enable the government to make its decisions on a more global basis in solidarity with the rest of Belgium, Europe and the world. In order to better identify these indirect emissions and determine the progress made through measures in this respect, the government undertakes to: - equip itself, by 2021, with the means to better calculate and regularly monitor these indirect GHG emissions. This work on data could prove a useful addition to the Regional Energy Balance.  Development of the circular economy Zero-waste lifestyles, prevention, reuse, repair, recycling, and service or collaborative economy models are vital ingredients for drastically reducing our indirect emissions. An ambitious circular economy policy has the side effect of increasing the capacity of society and the region to adapt because it reduces the dependence on imported raw materials and increases local economic autonomy by reducing the length of logistics flows and mobilising the r It also enables a better response to global warming and shocks that may affect international logistics chains and natural resources around the world. 127 Moving from a linear economic model to a circular economic model involves adopting a vision and a strategy consistent with building the circular economy and integrating it within all regional policies (economy, jobs and training, research and innovation, environment, spatial planning, waste management, etc.) by encouraging synergies and coordinating the various stakeholders and initiatives in this area. Against this background, the region will put the economic transition at the heart of its strategy and will gradually, and as a priority, target its resources at businesses operating in an environmentally and socially responsible manner. The declared ambition is to place Brussels at the forefront of the ecological and inclusive transition by rooting its economic activity within the region, developing high-quality jobs that cannot be relocated, and offering local and high-quality goods and services. In agreement with the social partners and building on the existing impetus, economic support tools will be gradually steered towards support for the transition of all businesses and sectors to decarbonised production models, the circular and regenerative economy, and the social economy. The gcontinue to benefit from regional public support.  PREC) has three general objectives: - transform the environmental objectives into economic opportunities; - root the economy in Brussels in order to produce locally where possible, reduce travel, optimise use of the region and created added value for residents of Brussels; - help to create jobs. This programme consists of 111 measures divided into four strategic parts: cross-cutting measures; sectoral measures; regional measures, and governance measures. For each measure, the PREC details the project leader, timescale, milestones and objectives, as well as the partners involved. At sectoral level, the PREC focuses on the five sectors that consume the most resources: construction, resources and waste, logistics, retail and food. The government will: - develop a strategy consistent with building the circular economy, in particular by implementing the measures in the PREC; - adapt the regulatory and economic framework, and also taxation, in order to support the development of circular economic activities; - encourage a circular regional policy with regard to sustainable public contracts and purchasing; -  - pursue its policy of eco-construction by developing circular construction and locating as many jobs and as much economic activity as possible in this sector in Brussels.  Food Food is a key issue when considering the r According to the low-carbon study, 15% of the rked to the production, transport and processing of food products. Possible measures in this respect include promoting organic farming as this reduces the use of carbon-intensive synthetic chemicals and is better for the soil, biodiversity and human health. Meat consumption also causes significant emissions and is increasing deforestation across the world (to feed cattle) (57).                                                            57 According to the latest FAO report, cattle intended for meat production are therefore responsible for 14.5% of GHG emissions and for four fifths of emissions from the agricultural sector. The IPPC Fifth Assessment Report also recommends significantly reducing meat consumption. Another key area with an impact on indirect emissions is reducing food waste. 128 The region is already working to develop a more sustainable food system through the Good Food Strategy (58). Under this energy and climate plan, the government will take the following steps. - Continue and reinforce the Good Food Strategy and, with a view to reducing the rtotal carbon footprint, include it in a common vision developed with all the stakeholders in this sector, including public players. The aim will be to move towards a genuine urban agricultural strategy by launching an -Environment- stakeholders in urban farming, hospitality, processing and distribution, training and employment in Brussels and its surroundings in order to maximise the production, processing and consumption of local, sustainable and affordable food. - In order to promote urban and peri-urban farming, the government intends to set ambitious targets in this respect, namely the minimum production of 30% of the annual consumption in Brussels of fruit and vegetables by 2035. - Develop sustainable urban ecological farming by implementing a support policy (particularly for the purchase of land) for new urban farmers and market gardeners. - Develop strong cooperation between the Flemish and Walloon public authorities and operators in order to create a food belt to feed Brussels. - Set up an integrated logistics offer (cleaning and packaging, transport and distribution) to allow small-scale producers to easily sell their products. - Set up a scientific reference centre to demonstrate the best possible ecological farming techniques suited to the urban environment, with a seed bank in particular. - Support the non-professional food production projects of citizens, schools, community groups, associations and public authorities. - Support the roll-out of a sustainable food supply (based on the criteria of the Good Food Strategy) in school canteens (as a priority), other canteens and restaurants managed directly or indirectly by public authorities.  Facilities Consumer goods and services account for another large chunk of indirect emissions in the Brussels Capital Region (65%). Work on this aspect will require significant long-term efforts. Initiatives have already been implemented through the PREC and the new Resources and Waste Management Plan (Plan de Gestion des Ressources et des Déchets  PGRD). Over the period 2021-2030, the government will also: - include in the Good Move regional mobility plan and implement the objective of encouraging people away from private vehicles by developing non-individual transport solutions as a priority, increasing the resources allocated to public transport and facilitating the penetration of shared vehicles; - create a register of transport facilities available from municipalities and regional bodies with a view to sharing tools and limiting these facilities to what is strictly necessary; - set up by 2021 a central fleet management and transport facility purchasing unit at regional level, which will prioritise the purchase of zero-emission, energy-efficient, repairable and recyclable vehicles with the smallest possible total carbon footprint;                                                            58 The Good Food Strategy was adopted by the Government of the Brussels Capital Region on 17 December 2015. 129 - revise by 2030 the tool for assessing environmental performance, used under the regulation on the exemplary role of the public authorities in terms of transport, in order to include the indirect emissions of vehicles (59).  Cooperation with the Federal Government - Introduction of a carbon pricing system (in order to internalise the damage caused by GHG emissions and steer economic operators towards the most decarbonised solutions possible). Failing that, the government will argue for the gradual increase of fuel duty. - Reduction in VAT on repair services. - Adaptation and gradual tightening of product standards with an eventual ban on the marketing of:  energy-intensive domestic appliances;  drinks in plastic bottles, with the simultaneous introduction of a framework encouraging the use of deposits and the adoption of two or three standard formats for all drinks sold in Belgium.  B. Transport and mobility Policies and measures to reduce GHG emissions from transport are organised according to the following three priorities: 1. reduce demand for mobility, mainly through spatial planning (reduction of distances between residential areas, amenities and recreational facilities) and a cultural shift in behaviour; 2. guide the development of mobility through investments in multimodal mobility systems and promote a modal shift by strengthening and improving public transport and encouraging the use of soft mobility (e.g. walking and cycling); 3. aim for the gradual decarbonisation of the remaining road transport through the use of low- or zero-carbon technologies.  An interfederal cooperation agreement on mobility will be signed by 1 July 2021 following consultations between the Federal Government and the Regions on specific subjects (e.g. public transport, taxation of transport, etc.) requiring such agreement in order to implement some of the measures set out in this plan. A cooperation agreement may be signed with leasing companies on vehicle registration tax/annual road tax in the form of a partnership, independent state-owned enterprise or non-profit organisation.  Federal State  See point 3.1.3(iii).  Flemish Region To reduce the impact of transport on the climate, we are pursuing a vigorous three-part approach. Sustainable regional development supports sustainable accessibility. We want the growth in motorised goods transport to level off and motorised passenger transport to reduce, which requires an ambitious modal shift in terms of both passenger transport and logistics. Lastly, we want to further green the existing vehicle fleet. From 2030, all new passenger cars sold will be low-emission vehicles, and at least half will be zero-emission.                                                             59 Decree of the Government of the Brussels Capital Region of 15 May 2014 on the exemplary role of the public authorities in terms of transport. 130  Investing in accessibility by focusing on demand One of the key points in developing basic accessibility is the capacity to access important social and economic locations. The starting point in this respect is the effective demand for transport, rather than the supply. A more efficient transport system will be achieved by using resources in an optimal and targeted manner, providing a system that improves accessibility in a better and more efficient way and that persuades people to use more sustainable and cleaner forms of transport. Daily journeys that involve several forms of transport require a solid mobility network that people use based on their transport demand. Resources are therefore focused on measures offering the highest social and economic return. Attractive pedestrian and cycle networks (i.e. coherent, safe, comfortable, direct and with amenity value), equipped with the necessary facilities for cyclists, contribute to safe and active mobility. Direct cycle routes and cohesive networks, together with the increased use of (electric) cycles, help to make cycling more attractive as a form of transport. We are supporting the positive trend towards more journeys by cycle. We are developing urban routes that ensure the smooth and safe flow of motorised transport, which must significantly reduce in volume. Fluidity is the key on the main roads of the core network.  A modal shift to more journeys by cycle makes a significant contribution to reducing CO2 emissions. Flanders is focusing on creating a network of supralocal functional cycle routes, together with cycle highways. This investment needs to be accelerated and also more targeted, initially around town centres because they deliver the best results. Flanders is already making additional efforts, but more can always be done. As a result, between 2019 and 2023 the Flemish Government will continue the trend of increasing investment in cycling. In 2019 we have invested at least EUR 150 million and we plan to sharply increase this figure to EUR 300 million for the cycling infrastructure.  The capacity of public transport systems will be adapted to the growing user demand stemming from population growth and increased density. Compared with 2013, demand has risen by 63% for bus, tram and metro services and by 45% for train services.  Pedestrian and cycle networks will be made more attractive. Cycle highways will offer quick, safe and direct routes between urban centres, employment clusters and major public transport hubs.   We will create the spatial conditions for environmentally friendly mobility and sustainable accessibility The spatial organisation needs to be focused on proximity to ensure sustainable accessibility in the transport regions. To achieve a smooth-running multimodal transport system that supports the combined use of sustainable forms of transport, new spatial developments will be based around the transport system. By ensuring that the links between homes and workplaces (within existing networks) and road transport hubs are sustainably organised now and in the future, spatial policy will ensure that transport systems are cost-effective. Together with developing basic accessibility rooted in demand, this spatial proximity will ensure the optimum conditions for successful combined mobility. The targeted development of networks and the efficient organisation of logistics will also help to increase the accessibility of social functions situated in easily accessible locations. In the strategic vision of the Spatial Policy Plan for Flanders, the Flemish Government has outlined how the region will develop in the next few decades. The aim is that, by 2050, more people will be able to travel to work or school on foot, by bike or possibly, in the future, using other sustainable forms of transport. They will also have basic services within their immediate environment. To that end, new homes and workplaces will be located as far as possible within existing networks and close to road transport hubs and service hubs. Logistical activities 131 will ideally be carried out within regional road transport hubs that are linked to the mainland connections of the trans-European transport network. Improved multimodal access is very important in this respect. Functions such as housing, work and structures will ideally be closely linked to limit the number of journeys. However, not all functions can be combined within a single location. Their separation remains the best solution for those disturbing activities that require numerous direct environmental mitigation measures or for those activities that attract large volumes of traffic. In this specific context, we will adopt various measures that are detailed in the Air Quality Plan.   Controlling the development of mobility To achieve the climate targets, we must take draconian steps in terms of mobility and transport. First of all, we must endeavour to control demand for mobility. This can be achieved through spatial and social action, where each kilometre avoided contributes to the goal. At the same time, we must make mobility more sustainable. Developing an integrated, smart and robust multimodal mobility system that offers sufficient capacity should enable improved traffic flow and greater use of alternatives. This is the second part of the approach to reducing emissions. Lastly, we will undertake an ambitious and extensive greening of the vehicle fleet. It is only by tackling these three aspects simultaneously that we will achieve the climate targets.   Preparing transport networks for the future To improve accessibility, investments will be made to futureproof the various transport networks. Stable investment in network maintenance and targeted investments in capacity and service development are also required. The aim is to ensure that these networks can respond to future challenges, such as the development of autonomous and connected modes of transport, conversion to clean vehicles and vessels, etc. The investments will focus on achieving the highest possible economic and social returns. Given our ambition of guaranteeing basic accessibility in Flanders, networks must have the necessary capacity to cope with the expected growth. They must also be reliable enough to offer the service quality levels that are needed to ensure basic accessibility. To ensure robust and safe transport networks, we must structure and categorise them hierarchically. Developing a solid and comprehensive core multimodal network is vital in this respect. This core network will then be optimised where necessary through targeted and mutually-reinforcing investments. Local and regional demand in transport regions consisting of several municipalities must be harmonised based on real and potential transport flows.   Developing an integrated multimodal and synchromodal mobility system Well-integrated modal networks are needed to ensure effective combined mobility and synchromodality as well as efficient logistical organisation. This gives travellers, commuters and businesses more options for travel or transporting goods sustainably and makes better use of available transport capacity. To ensure an integrated multimodal transport system, a hierarchical network of road transport hubs is being developed to provide a multimodal service within which users can transfer between different modes. The smooth exchange of data is also vital in this respect. Linking several networks more closely requires data to be fully exchanged between the various modes and personalised mobility solutions to be offered. In terms of logistics, developments in technology are simplifying information flows and facilitating cooperation between players in the value chain. This is resulting in genuine synchromodality, which is particularly important in goods transport on inland waterways and railways. The removal of obstacles between the various modes of transport, and also between public, private and shared transport, will radically alter mobility as we know it today. The cooperation between public and private parties on the one hand and with numerous other social players and citizens on the other hand also needs to be 132 increased as a result. We must also prepare for these new forms of cooperation not only within the Flemish region as a whole, but also within the transport regions. As the government, we want to be even more active in developing sustainable transport to and from the ports. This is already occurring through existing operational subsidies that are aimed at improving connectivity and increasing container transport by rail and inland waterway. We will endeavour to better link new initiatives with results already achieved, and we will work on a regulatory and incentive framework. This will all be carried out under the cooperation agreement signed in 2019 with the Flemish port undertakings. This agreement will be further developed through individual agreements between the Flemish Region and one or more individual port undertakings. New initiatives to improve inland connectivity form a key part of these individual agreements and the individual air and climate agreements that will also be signed. As the mobility policy aims to achieve a significant modal shift from road transport to the railways and inland particular be improved by using cleaner fuels and engines and shoreside electricity.   We will change behaviour Travellers, commuters and businesses must change their behaviour by using sustainable forms of transport more often. To achieve behaviour change, a spatial organisation is needed that supports green mobility and logistics (see above), as well as attractive and exciting measures to incentivise changes in behaviour (such as a wide range of clean forms of transport).  As set out in the Air Policy Plan, we will encourage sectoral organisations, businesses and associations to adopt targeted measures so that individuals and businesses can more often choose sustainable alternatives to the car and easily transfer from one mode of transport to another. This will reduce the number of vehicle-kilometres to a maximum of 44.5 billion by 2025 and a maximum of 38.4 billion by 2030 (compared with 42 billion in 2005 and 45.3 billion in 2015). We are thinking in this respect of bottom-up initiatives that aim to avoid and replace vehicle-kilometres for both commuting and leisure travel. Measures to green company fleets are also an option. Together with the Federal Government and the other Regions, we are looking at how we can green company cars as quickly as possible. To that end, we are searching for partners who want to, and can, take specific measures, such as businesses taking specific steps to encourage workers to travel to work by a form of transport other than the car. With the VOKA (Flemish Economic Association), FEB (Belgian Business Federation), UNIZO (Union of Self-Employed Entrepreneurs) and other relevant organisations, we are looking at possible coordination measures. We are focusing on sport and culture to make leisure travel more sustainable, and are therefore trying to harmonise and realise existing initiatives as far as possible. With regard to goods transport, we are also encouraging sectoral organisations and businesses to further optimise the loading of goods. The Federal Government is responsible for tackling some travel behaviour, such as the important issue of company cars. Having a company car and a fuel card results in more vehicle-kilometres. Adapting this system is therefore recommended in terms of both mobility and the environment. We are monitoring the changes to the mobility budget and will suggest adjustments if necessary. We are also calling for a tax incentive for soft mobility and using forms of transport other than private cars (walking, cycling, public transport). We are urging the Federal Government to increase investment in the rail transport offer and infrastructure. We are also waiting for the Federal Government to improve short-distance container transport and groupage transport over short and medium distances, commit to increased flexibility and reliability on the part of the infrastructure manager, adapt the infrastructure for longer trains by loosening the regulations, and create a web-based tracking and tracing platform for goods. We are focusing just as much on the non-from behavioural psychology that, without question, our behaviour is not always guided by rational considerations (such as price). We often allow ourselves to be guided by our emotions, reflexes and 133 social/cultural background. We must therefore also work on instruments that act on emotions or social norms and that break habits. In this respect, we are focusing just as much on the target group of construction vehicles, which are often left to idle for no good reason.   We will aim for a sustainable modal shift in cooperation with the transport regions We are focusing on levelling off the growth in motorised transport. We are also aiming for an ambitious modal shift, in terms of both passenger transport and logistics, by continuing to develop a profitable and demand-driven public transport network. We are also continuing the upward trend in cycling investment. The share of sustainable forms of transport (walking, (e-)scooters, (e-)bikes or speed pedelecs, clean systems or sub-systems, public transport and taxis) must increase to at least 40% throughout Flanders. This ambitious modal shift target also applies to the transport regions. In fact, for those transport regions covering the Flemish periphery, Antwerp and Ghent, the target is at least a 50% share. The network of facilities for cyclists, public transport and Points Mob (mobility hubs) should contribute to the modal shift ambition. By the end of 2021, we will therefore produce concrete tailored action plans for each transport region. We are investing in alternatives to cars and lorries and creating a multimodal mobility system that will convince travellers and commuters to use the most sustainable form of transport (mobility as a service). We are continuing to encourage and facilitate transport by rail, inland waterway and estuary navigation. We are optimising the journeys for which the tax per kilometre for heavy goods vehicles applies. We are examining how the deliveries of online shops and other courier services can be made sustainable.  We will review climate and air quality targets when assessing traffic-generating functions and major infrastructure projects  Major infrastructure projects can significantly increase traffic flows and emissions. As a result, during the authorisation process, we are evaluating their impact with a view to achieving the climate and air quality targets and making considered choices. Where the construction of traffic-generating functions is authorised, the necessary measures must be taken to guarantee sustainable and environmentally friendly mobility.  We will green the fleet  In addition to investing in alternatives to cars and lorries and reducing vehicle-kilometres, it is vital to make mobility significantly greener in order to achieve the climate targets. Reducing CO2 emissions from mobility is the ultimate goal in this respect, rather than encouraging any particular technology. This means that all technologies and fuel types making a contribution to low-carbon mobility have a place in Flanders. CO2 emissions are therefore calculated on the basis of a life cycle assessment (LCA). One of the key policy frameworks is the European Clean Power for Transport Directive (CPT Directive). Flanders is committed to the objectives of this Directive, which is aiming for an increasing number of vehicles to have alternative propulsion systems. The Flemish ambitions in this respect are outlined up to 2020 in the Flemish CPT Action Plan; the ambitions up to 2030 will be set out in a new CPT vision, together with an action plan. Flanders is concentrating its efforts in this respect on low-carbon and zero-emission vehicles. With regard to electric vehicles, the purchase price, supply (models and volumes) and range will continue to be brakes on their penetration. These brakes will gradually be removed as prices fall across the board and batteries improve. The Total Cost of Ownership of battery electric cars is predicted to be the same as that of traditional cars by 2025. To speed up the penetration of zero-emission passenger cars/vans and low-carbon lorries, the public authorities are encouraging the market, in particular through the Flemish road tax and a sustainable vision, and also through European standardisation. Despite the crucial role that the electrification of vehicles plays in achieving the climate targets, the environmental impact of the manufacture and use of such methods of transport cannot be ignored. Their impact also stems from the energy mix used to generate the electricity and from the nature of batteries: the way in 134 which they are manufactured, used and recycled. Even as such methods of transport become more prevalent, it will still be important to ensure that mobility is used rationally, that alternatives to cars and lorries are used as much as possible, and that motorised transport is therefore avoided. In agreement with local authorities, we will gradually halt the use of two-stroke machinery to maintain public green spaces. New machinery purchased to maintain such spaces under local authority management will be emission-free (except for large machinery for which there are no alternatives or where the alternatives are too small). We will impose similar conditions when awarding contracts for maintenance services.  We will encourage the vehicle market  To allow the planned switch to low-carbon and zero-emission cars, the supply of zero-emission vehicles (number of models, number of cars on offer, range, etc.) must improve over the next few years, including in the lower-priced segments, and their purchase price must fall. There are reasons to believe that, after 2020, supply and demand will even out and that the step can be taken towards mass production/use. For this purpose, a properly functioning market, which no longer needs subsidies, is ultimately necessary. By allowing all technologies to compete, the best solution will be found at the lowest possible cost for society. However, we are not yet at this critical point and the market itself has a role to play in this context, both in ensuring the necessary supply and in increasing demand (particularly through promotions). As a result, by 2025 there should be a supply of low-carbon and zero-emission models of passenger cars, vans, city buses and mopeds/motorcycles that is comparable (price, range, choice, size, type, comfort, etc.) to that of conventional models. The public authorities will also encourage the low-carbon and zero-emission vehicle market, in particular through a sustainable vision and ambitious European CO2 standards, which should ensure a level playing field. Individuals, fleet owners (businesses, public authorities, etc.) and leasing companies will also be constantly encouraged to green their vehicles through other measures in the CPT action plans.  We will encourage the use of light vehicles that are primarily electric  Within a multimodal mobility system, for individual journeys, light electric vehicles such as electric bicycles, speed pedelecs and motorcycles are more environmentally friendly and energy efficient than heavier alternatives. This of course also applies to standard bicycles. We will work to adapt public land in order to create the space and infrastructure needed for safe and comfortable use of such methods of transport. We will also develop coherent, comfortable and safe networks for soft or softer mobility. Light electric vehicles (LEV) offer great environmental potential for both commuting and logistics. A recently completed Pote (Potential of light electric vehicles) mapped out the sector and made recommendations for further releasing this potential. Based on this study in particular, we will shortly produce a specific policy for light electric transport. The priorities in this respect are incentives for light vehicles, simple legislation based on actual speed and not on vehicle type, adapted road, parking and charging infrastructure, attention to quality (and quality labels), tax incentives and positive campaigns.  We will support the purchase and use of zero-emission vehicles Tax reliefs are key instruments for ensuring that the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) of zero-emission vehicles in particular falls at a quicker pace. We are boosting the capacity of tax instruments to green the vehicle fleet. In this respect, we will reform road taxation by 2021 to take account of the new emissions tests (WLTP) and the progress made towards eliminating diesel and to continue promoting the use of energy-efficient (low-carbon) and zero-emission vehicles. We will also look at further ways of increasing the price of more polluting vehicles, making vehicles cleaner and making zero-emission vehicles in particular more attractive. There may also be other incentives that we can offer to overcome the higher price of zero-emission vehicles, initiate/maintain the transition and achieve the fleet 135 targets. In order to meet the 2025 and 2030 targets, the benefits granted to zero-emission vehicles must become more attractive over the next five years.  We will guide the associated charging/refuelling infrastructure towards the future We are also committed to rolling out as quickly as possible the basic charging infrastructure of 7,400 publicly accessible charging points, spread throughout Flanders. Additionally, fast charging infrastructure will be installed along the major traffic routes, with charging points every 25 km. As the fleet expands, the capacity of the charging infrastructure must also increase. Based on current figures, investment needs to be made in further public, semi-public and private charging points. The fast charging infrastructure will also be developed. We are assessing the roll-out of public and semi-public charging and refuelling infrastructure and extending this infrastructure in a targeted manner. As regards the charging points, semi-public fast chargers are being prioritised. The approach for the period to 2025 will be outlined in 2020. To ensure uniformity and economies of scale, we have already started developing this approach at regional level, but will also consult the transport regions and local authorities. Proper monitoring of the development and of the use of charging infrastructure will ensure that this roll-out can be quickly speeded up where necessary. The manner of the roll-out will not only depend on available space, parking policies, and location and nature of the electricity network, but also on ease of use for EV drivers, with proximity and accessibility being prioritised. As regards the public charging infrastructure, strategic positioning will be combined with effective positioning on demand. The approach will be adapted to local circumstances. Districts with a large number of housing units without their own parking facilities will therefore require more effort to be made. One key point is the gradual conversion of the 230V networks to 400V networks, which are better suited to charging infrastructure, although this will require additional investment. The distribution system operator Fluvius must map out the necessary investments as quickly as possible, and then plan and implement those investments as necessary. With fast chargers currently charging at 50 kW, there are concrete plans to increase this power to 150 kW, and even 350 kW, by 2020. Combined with vehicles having a longer range, this means that the obstacles in terms of charging time and range will be eliminated. However, this does not come without a cost, namely the investments and challenges associated with connecting to the grid and potential local increases in peak loads. These can be prevented by combining fast chargers with associated batteries on site or through additional investments in the grid. To ease the minds of EV drivers, public and semi-public charging infrastructure must not be just accessible but also easily accessible, irrespective of who owns or operates the charging station. Interoperability and standardisation will become a reality in Flanders, and where possible at European level, by 2020. By then, there must also be a structural solution for managing and accessing information on charging stations. This does not only involve static information (such as location and power), but also dynamic information (price information and whether or not the charging point is occupied) and information on smart charging at such points. Private and semi-private charging also needs to be considered, not just because of its relative importance, but also because of its inherent additional advantages. This network must be efficiently organised, cheaper to use and better managed and monitored. Monitoring can also ensure that PHEVs are used more in electric mode. The advantages lie in particular in developing charging systems at workplaces. A proactive approach would be for the entire connection and cabling needed to be installed, as a priority for private and semi-private charging, when the opportunity arises. The possibility of offering support in this respect will be examined. A recent European directive sets out the obligations in this regard, particularly in terms of charging infrastructure in the parking lots of buildings. These obligations need to be transposed into Flemish law by the start of 2020. The link between electric vehicles and the electricity system is becoming increasingly significant as more and more electric vehicles are driven and connected to the grid. The first milestone will be reached when the charging process is determined by the time and intensity. The existing grid only has sufficient capacity if simultaneous charging can be avoided. By controlling the charging process, peaks can be avoided and the available power can be intelligently distributed. The growing proportion of intermittent (renewable) energy 136 sources means that demand-side management or additional investments in the grid are essential. The introduction of smart meters is enabling large-scale application, primarily in the private context. This will quickly catch on if it can also be factored into the price that the EV driver or business pays. Further options will emerge when bidirectional charging can eventually be used. In this case, electric vehicles will act as a buffer in both directions and will become an integral part of the energy system. When all sorts of energy services can be delivered through aggregators or other means (reserve capacity, switching, frequency regulation, etc.), it will become possible for self-generated electricity to be stored or for consumers to supply their own homes with electricity through the battery in their car. As the number of electric vehicles increases, the capacity or local capacity of the grid will become an additional challenge. While the numbers are limited (e.g. up to 150,000 electric cars), there will be few issues overall. Through smart management, the current distribution system should even be able to support up to 500,000 electric cars. Between 2025 and 2030, more drastic changes to the distribution system may be needed, unless the options offered by the medium-voltage system can be better utilised. This system could currently support around 1,000,000 electric cars. Once again, Fluvius must map out the necessary investments as quickly as possible, and then plan and implement those investments as necessary. The electricity generation capacity is seen as less of a problem, particularly while the electric fleet remains under 20% (CREG study). Smart demand-side management also ensures that charging is spread over time, to avoid peaks, and that it occurs when there is plenty of renewable electricity available. The public authorities will facilitate these new developments and remove any legal or technical barriers. The charging infrastructure will be powered, as far as possible, by electricity from renewable sources. As with other technologies, the source is important and green  will be the aim so that we have green hydrogen and green gas. The challenge over the coming period is to develop a network of hydrogen refuelling stations similar to the network of conventional or CNG stations, albeit on a different scale. We will make progress in this respect in 2020 through a number of European projects, including our own BENEFIC project. The way in which this network will be rolled out up to 2030 will largely depend on the technology choices made by the heavier freight market.  We will introduce low-carbon and zero-emission (shared) vehicles through niche and company fleets  As a number of barriers are less of an issue for niche fleets (taxis, shared systems, buses, etc.) and company fleets, particularly because their journeys are fixed or can be planned and/or their home locations are fixed, they are the first in line in the transition to zero-emission vehicles and low-carbon fuels. Taxis and shared systems are mostly used for shorter distances in urban environments. We are focusing on greening these systems with a view to large-scale electrification over time. When granting permits to operate an individual paid passenger transport service, municipalities will take account of the minimum environmental criteria in the national and local decrees on taxis, and may also impose additional requirements for zero-emission taxis. From 2030, it will only be possible to register zero-emission taxis with the Vehicle Registration Directorate (Direction pour lImmatriculation des Véhicules  DIV). We will also further build on the results of the E-Taxi project and develop the necessary initiatives based on the CPT projects and the work within the Green Deal for Shared Mobility. Flanders operates public buses together with De Lijn and has opted for the principle of switching to alternative fuels based on electricity and hydrogen. From 2019, only zero-emission buses will be permitted in any new procurement by De Lijn. By 2025, there will only be emission-free buses in city centres. subcontractors will be brought on board in this respect as much as possible. A total of 925 battery electric buses will be purchased between 2020 and 2024, as announced in the September 2018 statement. This will mark the first step towards an entirely zero-emission bus fleet for public transport by 2035 at the latest. The possibility of deconsolidating De Lijn will be expressly examined. Operating outside the consolidation perimeter will enable (more) creative investment plans. However, the Flemish Government has indicated its intention to remain as the majority shareholder. European obligations, such as the revised European Directive on the promotion of 137 clean and energy-efficient road transport vehicles (2009/33/EC), will be taken into account in this respect, along with the study on the greening of Flemish public transport carried out by the European Investment Advisory Hub (EIAH) and the results of ongoing projects, including the European ZeEUS project and the Zero-Emission Bus (Zero-Emissie Bus  ZEB) project in Flanders. In addition to specific niche fleets, owners of large fleets will have to commit to the transition to low-carbon and zero-emission vehicles through specific measures/agreements. We will examine, together with the Federal Government and the other Regions, how we can speed up the greening of company cars. In this respect, the policy recommendations made in the Electric Company Cars Platform (Platform Elektrische Bedrijfswagens  PEB) project will also be taken into account. The leasing sector and other business sectors will be closely involved in this work. The main levers of federal company car taxation have also been identified in Flanders as they hold enormous potential in terms of future greening. The Flemish Government will include its own fleet in the various initiatives and aims to lead by example, particularly in terms of the targets set. The ustainable Mobility action plan is one step towards achieving the Flemish Government to reduce CO2 emissions by 40% by 2030 compared with 2015. Within this framework, the Flemish Government has decided that, from 2021, it will not purchase or lease any more cars that only have a conventional combustion engine. Furthermore, Flanders is required to meet the targets set in the revised European Directive on the promotion of clean and energy-efficient road transport vehicles (2009/33/EC) when purchasing or leasing vehicles for its own fleet.  We will encourage innovation in order to develop solutions for freight transport A roadmap for reducing climate and air emissions from freight transport (roadmap voor de vermindering van klimaat- en luchtemissies van vrachtvervoer) was recently produced. Introducing zero-emission urban zones for freight transport, electric lorries (with an electric battery or fuel cell) and heavy goods vehicles powered by biofuels are key elements in the preferred scenario indicated for 2030. Due to the many remaining challenges, using electric road systems and hydrogen-powered lorries is included only as an option. Lorries running on (bio)methane are suggested as a separate alternative. The climate potential of LNG/CNG is still limited, if not non-existent, but these gases could form a temporary solution during the transition to applications based on renewable biomethane, although their feasibility and availability are still uncertain. With regard to vans and small lorries, we are aiming for their conversion to battery electric vehicles, along with passenger cars. Mass production is expected from 2025, although this requires a systematic approach, sufficient charging infrastructure, zero-emission loading and unloading sites, and eventually local storage sites. This therefore goes hand in hand with the development of zero-emission zones. With regard to heavier lorries, which are responsible for around 80% of CO2 emissions, switching to zero-emission vehicles, or even low-carbon vehicles, is less easy. As a result, in the short term there will be few models available, except for short distances, and the supply of low-carbon fuel will be very limited. By 2030 we will carry out research into lorries powered by advanced renewable fuels (bio and synthetic) and fuel cells. We also expect breakthroughs in terms of batteries and charging infrastructure and/or electric road systems, which will reduce the total cost of ownership. Obligatory rest periods offer opportunities to charge vehicles along electric transport corridors. The issue of connecting to the electricity grid will also be examined in this respect. In the transitional period to low-carbon and zero-emission freight transport, CNG and LNG represent alternative fuels for lorries. Over the coming period, we will also focus on encouraging the necessary innovation, in particular by setting up demonstration projects along the lines of the Dutch example (see Demonstratieregeling Klimaattechnologieën en -innovaties in transport). The speed of introduction will also depend on the available funding. Through the environmental incentive, the Flemish Government is already providing funds to green lorries by switching them to hydrogen and natural gas. There is still potential in this respect given that this support measure is not yet being fully used and there are funds still available. Providing further innovation funds to make lorries greener will continue to be useful over the next few years. The scope will be extended to battery electric vehicles and infrastructure. To ensure a successful transition, support will also be given through projects as a priority, and 138 this will be coupled with developing a greening plan for fleet owners to fully convert their fleets in the short term (e.g. five years) to significantly more environmentally and climate friendly models.  We want to encourage the transition to a greener and more energy-efficient combined modal offer on a small scale. We are closely monitoring technological innovations in terms of making freight transport more sustainable (e.g. delivery by drone, hyperloops, etc.). We will examine the possibility of making online shop deliveries and other courier services more sustainable. We will encourage emission-free distribution so that, by 2025, only zero-emission vehicles are delivering in town centres.  We will assess the impact of new European vehicle standards  Ambitious European vehicle standards are the core policy instrument for reducing CO2 emissions from vehicles. There is no limit value for CO2 with which all cars must comply. However, obligations have been imposed on manufacturers, meaning that the average CO2 emissions of the cars sold by each manufacturer must not exceed 130 g/km by 2015, with a further reduction of 10 g/km for non-motorised means of transport, and 95 g/km by 2021. A new proposal with CO2 values for 2025 and 2030 was submitted at the end of 2017. The European Parliament and the Council have reached agreement on this issue. The average CO2 emissions of the new vehicles sold by each manufacturer are set to fall by 37.5% for cars and by 31% for vans by 2030 compared with 2021. An interim target has also been set: a 15% reduction in CO2 emissions for both types of vehicles by 2025 compared with 2021. The agreement also includes a mechanism to encourage zero- and low-emission vehicles (ZLEVs: vehicles with emissions between 0 mg/km and 50 mg/km) in the form of a reference value. ZLEV reference values will be 15% for cars and vans from 2025, 30% for vans from 2030 and 35% for cars from 2030. These are not therefore binding sales targets, but rather target values. If manufacturers sell more than 15% ZLEVs in 2025 and more than 30% or 35% in 2030, they will be rewarded with a bonus in the form of a reduction in their CO2 emissions reduction target (maximum of 5%). We will closely monitor the impact of the European Directive on the vehicle market and, at the same time, continue to work actively at European level to develop and design this framework. Since 2019, lorry manufacturers have been required to measure the fuel consumption of their vehicles using the VECTO test procedure and report CO2 and other vehicle data to the European Commission. The Commission proposal aimed at reducing CO2 emissions from heavy goods vehicles was approved by the European Parliament and the Council on 22 February 2019. The agreement aims to reduce CO2 emissions from new lorries by 15% from 2025 and by 30% from 2030 compared with the baseline level in 2019/2020. The 2030 reduction target is binding, unless otherwise decided during the review planned for 2022. The agreement reached is very close to - and low-emission lorries (ZLEVs), which will involve a system of super-credits up to 2024. From 2025, the system of super-credits will be replaced with a reference value system (with a guideline value of 2% ZLEVs from 2025). The effectiveness of this mechanism to encourage ZLEVs will be assessed by the Commission during the review planned for 2022. We will closely monitor the 2022 assessment and determine its impact on emissions.  We will ensure that actual vehicle emissions fall We will call for test procedures that better calculate actual fuel consumption and CO2 emissions It is currently common knowledge that the emissions declared for vehicles based on laboratory tests are not representative of the emissions produced under real driving conditions. The actual CO2 emissions and the emissions measured during dynamometer testing (type-approval values) are increasingly different. We therefore call on the European Commission to take the necessary initiatives to ensure that actual emissions are aligned with type-approval values in the near future. The agreement reached on CO2 emission standards for new cars and light-duty vehicles contains a number of guarantees that the difference between emissions measured in the laboratory (WLTP values) and actual emissions will not increase any further up to 2030. The agreement provides for the collection, publication and monitoring of emission data 139 in-conformity test combined with a mechanism allowing declared emissions to be adjusted in the event of significant differences from the values indicated in the type-approval.  We will ensure a smooth traffic flow and steady speed Vehicle CO2 emissions are closely linked to fuel consumption. These aspects largely depend on driving behaviour, which is also influenced by road infrastructure, environmental management and traffic rules. Certain aspects that can improve driving dynamics are detailed below.  Average speed monitoring  Average speed monitoring ensures a more constant average speed and smoother traffic flow. Every year for at least three years, we will install 20 average speed monitoring systems in new locations on regional roads. We also want to significantly increase the number of average speed monitoring systems on motorways. The ambition is to achieve a coverage of ±50% by making use of the federal ANPR network on motorways.  Smart traffic lights and green wave  Junctions need to be equipped with smarter traffic lights that respond more dynamically and flexibly to the actual traffic situation at junctions where the signal control system has been optimised. By making traffic lights more dynamic and flexible, cars can be prevented from needlessly stopping at a red light and emitting even more CO2. In this study, we will also look at how the central traffic management computer, which has proven its value, can be extended throughout Flanders (road safety has priority over traffic flow).  Self-driving and automated vehicles  We want to be a world leader in innovation with regard to connected and autonomous mobility. That is why we are joining forces with manufacturers, operators and data providers, research institutes, transport operators and other authorities to find smart and innovative mobility solutions. The development of connected and autonomous means of transport offers excellent opportunities not only to make traffic safer and smoother (reduction in the number of accidents, reduction in the distance between vehicles), but also to make mobility more sustainable and inclusive. It facilitates the combined use of different forms of transport, but also presents new challenges (potential increase in demand for mobility, cybersecurity, privacy, etc.). Through the Mobilidata programme, innovative mobility solutions are being developed in co-creation with private partners. Work is also ongoing to develop a digital data infrastructure, together with qualitative and reliable data sources.   We will reduce the maximum speed more quickly if fine particulate matter limits are exceeded Various mitigation measures can be taken if fine particulate matter limits are exceeded. For example, the speed on motorways and ring roads can be limited to 90 km/h. Generally limiting the maximum speed to 90 km/h also has a positive effect on CO2 emissions. We will reduce the maximum speed when there is a risk of fine particulate matter limits being exceeded. This measure has a positive impact on air quality for local residents and also a positive impact on CO2 emissions. The Flemish Minister of Mobility and Public Works, in consultation with the Flemish Environment Minister, will produce a model for this purpose. A recent study on the impact of speed limits on mobility and air quality shows that the scenario of limiting the speed to 100 km/h on the R0 has a limited positive impact on CO2 emissions, given that the current rate is more 140 or less maintained. Over the next few years, a series of large-scale and small-scale projects will be carried out along the R0. As a result, the speed limit will have to be adjusted to a maximum of 100 km/h. This will not apply across the entire motorway network. We are consulting with the Brussels Capital Region on these projects.  We will achieve more by working together The challenges involved in making the mobility system more sustainable are extensive, diverse and not ones that the Flemish Government can tackle alone. Many stakeholders, such as municipal and regional authorities, the Federal Government, infrastructure operators, transport service providers, users of the mobility system and the various segments of society must play an active role in this respect.  Regional transport cooperation  There are several levels and parties responsible for mobility within the government. A regional and integrated approach to basic accessibility is needed. Basic accessibility requires cooperation. An integrated approach to transport, infrastructure and spatial development is needed in the areas of planning, investment, operation and services.  Working with market players, businesses and knowledge institutions  The transition to the mobility of the future is a tale of cooperation involving various stakeholders and closely monitoring the development of new technologies. These stakeholders are the private sector, the academic/research world, social players and the relevant authorities. We will work with businesses and knowledge institutions within clusters of excellence to formulate and implement the research agenda and on various projects to prepare and implement policies. In collaboration with the private sector and the academic world, we will define and implement intelligent transport services (ITS) to facilitate changing mobility. ITS initiatives will grow from strategic clusters that will shape, guide and manage the development of the ITS plan for Flanders. In collaboration with transport and logistics bulogistics chains and make them more sustainable (maximum use of the inland waterways and rail transport, improved lorry load factors, etc.). It will be possible to use new technologies more safely, quickly and, above all, economically. A more comprehensive Internet of Things will encourage optimum data sharing. These developments will allow logistics processes to be managed and controlled efficiently, flexibly and reliably. They will help to produce a multimodal transport system and intelligent logistics services. These developments will be the driver of sustainable economic growth and will reinforce the competitiveness of our businesses. A Green Deal instrument can play a significant complementary role in speeding up the transition. The Green Deal for Shared Mobility began on 27 March 2017 and involves carpooling and bike sharing. The Green Deal for Sustainable Urban Logistics began on 2 April 2019 and focuses on the conscious behaviour of consumers and drivers, new logistics concepts, and technological regulations and innovations that make sense. Further Green Deals may follow. Various (private) partners and the government are working together on a green project based on a voluntary agreement. The independent mode-neutral platform Multimodaal.VlaanderenMultimodal Flanders), set up within the Flanders Innovation Cluster for Logistics (VIL), informs, alerts and guides businesses to encourage a change in attitude. This change in attitude should lead to (more) efficient use of the right modes of transport for the right business and the right flows. We are also planning research to gain an insight into the critical factors allowing a multimodal shift. We will study the business models for regional transshipment points for rail transport and the possibilities of eliminating physical and organisational hurdles to the groupage of goods for rail transport. A roadmap showing the most cost-efficient, logical and feasible way of achieving the ambitions to reduce both greenhouse gases and air 141 emissions within the set timescales will serve as the basis for further political and public debate on freight transport measures with regard to climate change and air pollution.  Working with citizens, associations and civil society organisations  To ensure smooth, safe and environmentally friendly mobility and logistics, the active participation of citizens, associations and civil society organisations is crucial. Over the last few years, digital platforms, online applications and new social visions have given rise to a range of sub-platforms (carpooling, central booking platforms, etc.), through which inhabitants and associations themselves take the initiative or make the necessary contacts to enable new forms of transport. As a government, we will support these processes. We will also promote them so that they are accepted more quickly by others.  Walloon Region The transport sector in general and mobility in particular will be studied based on three priorities that must better define the passenger and freight transport landscape to 2030 and serve as the basis for longer term objectives. The general aim is to prevent further growth in the vehicle fleet by offering effective alternatives for passenger -Shift-  Priority 1: Rationalise mobility needs (Avoid) transport system more sustainable. The Walloon Government has therefore developed a mobility vision to 2030, referred to as FAST. This vision aims to reduce the mobility of people by 5% by 2030 compared with 2017. Practical measures to achieve this aim need to be developed through the regional mobility strategy, in particular by reinforcing measures such as remote working, carpooling, etc. At the same time, measures under the spatial planning policy could enable businesses to locate in places that minimise travel needs (goods and people), encourage use of the most sustainable forms of transport (see priority 2 below) and even address the increasing length of car journeys or the increasing volume of goods transported. Policies promoting short supply circuits and local production and developing the circular economy and the service economy may also help to reduce freight transport demand (tkm)  Priority 2: Encourage modal shifts (Shift) and Climate Plan, is based on shifting freight transport by road to rail and waterway by 2030. The same applies to the mobility of people, with cars largely giving way to public transport and active forms of transport (walking, cycling, etc.). This vision is a complete reversal of the trend observed in recent decades. New measures to reduce demand for both passenger and freight transport will be needed to achieve the targets set. A plan to develop active forms of transport across the entire Walloon Region is therefore needed. This will involve funding and constructing safe pedestrian and cycle paths and infrastructure, and rebalancing public space in favour of these active forms of transport. The Walloon Government has committed to a budget for cycling of EUR 20 per inhabitant per year. These measures are set out in the regional mobility strategy and will have to be developed into a new Wallonia Regional Policy Statement, the aim is to adopt this plan by mid-2021. 142 The public transport offer, predominantly on the key routes and main transport systems (train, tram, metro), (mobility hub) approach, with the aim of implementing the   to form a transport network. Special attention must be paid to multimodal options in freight transport, by reinforcing groupage options (piggyback transport for example) and by reducing demand over the last miles, either by using adapted micrologistics or by shortening logistics circuits.  Priority 3: Improve vehicle performance (Improve) The aim is to further increase the electrification of cars to 2030. At the same time, new vehicle purchases will be steered towards less energy-intensive models (less powerful, lighter) in an approach that should also reduce road accidents. There must be a particular focus on ensuring improved accessibility for the entire population to these new technologies, mainly by reducing the extra cost that vehicles with alternative engines currently entail. This focus must therefore take account of the changing costs of these technologies. Further down the line, a dialogue with other levels of government will be needed to: - define a maximum GHG emission limit for new vehicles, with a gradual reduction in this maximum limit (this type of approach is less costly for public authorities and offers more reliable results); - examine the taxation of alternative fuels (gas and electricity); - consider tax policies connected with mobility and transport of people (mainly with regard to company vehicles). In addition, the overall efficiency of vehicles and their use must be considered more generally, in similar fashion er support measures or preventive vehicle maintenance measures (such as descaling engines). The efficiency of the logistics chain must also be considered. Particular attention must also be paid to the carbon footprint of vehicles and their refuelling in the case of alternative fuels. Use of renewable electricity and biogas will be increased. Low-carbon fuels will be generally assessed, mainly for modes of transport where electrification is difficult to envisage.  Mobility - FAST As a reminder, the FAST vision aims to promote the objectives of fluidity, accessibility, safety and health through the modal shift. To give practical effect to this vision, the multimodality model will have to be developed. In the light of current issues and challenges, only a model that combines the various modes effectively will offer maximum accessibility by simultaneously addressing both direct symptoms (i.e. accidents and congestion) and indirect symptoms (i.e. pollution and paralysis of the economy). This choice translates into a willingness to make large-scale structural changes to the relative shares of the various modes of transport (for both passengers and freight) and therefore to initiate the modal shift. The modal shift strategy will entail the near-simultaneous implementation of eight inextricably linked projects. As outlined in the FAST vision, the priorities for these eight projects are threefold; namely mobility governance, mobility supply and mobility demand. None of these projects is superfluous as each one is a prerequisite for success, which must be measured from an economic, social and environmental perspective in the short, medium and long term. The eight projects are: 1. to establish a harmonised and coherent model for the governance and management of mobility at regional level; 143 2. to predict and manage the social impacts of new technologies and patterns of use; 3. to increase the shared transport offer and focus each mode of transport on its relevant area; 4. to make co-modality more attractive for people and goods; 5. to harness technological developments to improve the efficiency and safety of transport systems; 6. to use regional planning to reduce the volume of travel; 7. to focus practical action on sustainable mobility using intelligent and targeted taxation (with the long-term aim being to encourage less powerful and lighter, and therefore less polluting, cars); 8. to inform, train and educate the public and civil society on sustainable mobility.  FAST 2030 is the subject of an action plan: the Regional Mobility Strategy (Stratégie Régionale de Mobilité  SRM). In the long term, this SRM must provide general guidelines for achieving the objectives. The first part of this SRM on passenger transport was approved by the Walloon Government on 9 May 2019 (60). The part on freight transport is yet to be completed. These texts will evolve to ensure the best possible response to the FAST objectives. Some of the SRM measures on passenger transport have already begun.  A. Development of the MaaS concept  mobipôles Mor mobility hubs will offer various services and enable people to change their mode of transport. Depending on their individual design, they may have car parks (in particular for carpooling), secure bike storage, bus stops, tram stops or access to railway stations, as well as other services such as new bus rapid transit (BRT) services, fully connected co-working spaces, bike hire, charging stations in line with the ost-diesel strategy (electricity, gas, etc.), shared vehicles, etc. These multimodal platforms must be positioned carefully in relation to existing infrastructure and must also be connected to the following: - the telecommunications network operated by Sofico; - residential areas and business hubs, by creating links that are accessible to active forms of transport and by creating or upgrading bus routes with new BRT services. The primary aim of the mobility hubs is to promote smart mobility, i.e. a system centred around sustainable, efficient and innovative mobility solutions and behaviours. A mobility hub can be defined as follows. 1. It is a physical location with a well-structured mobility offer that appeals -structured offeravailable services make them more attractive than traditional (sub-capacity) car use. This offer will involve developing types of service with characteristics that particularly meet the expectations of future users. 2. It is also a place that provides as many accessibility solutions as possible to as many people as possible. The aim in this regard is to avoid scattering infrastructure funding around the region. The careful choice of mobility hub locations will make it possible to minimise infrastructure funding. 3. Finally, it is a place designed to become a transit location. Ways must therefore be found of making it attractive to users, so that a detour to get there is worthwhile. The provision of services such as co-working spaces may be appropriate in this context. The aim is not for individuals to spend long periods of time there, however, but to pass through it as a transit hub using the fastest possible mobility solution. Any services offered should therefore help to make it worthwhile for users to visit the transit hub (e.g. co-working spaces, car wash, parcel pick-up/drop-off point). They should also allow users to avoid another journey.                                                            60 http://mobilite.wallonie.be/files/eDocsMobilite/politiques%20de%20mobilit%c3%a9/SRM_PERSONNES_2019.pdf  144 4. The mobility hub concept will only make sense and have any chance of success if its use becomes almost unavoidable. Measures aimed at ensuring that this is the case must be carried out on both the supply and the demand sides. In order to guarantee success, smart mobility must be incentivised (e.g. tax deductibility of shared cars, etc.) alongside supply-side measures. 5. If the trial proves successful, it will also be useful to integrate energy considerations (relating to both production and consumption) in tandem with the mobility aspects. Interactions between these two areas are also likely to deliver economic and environmental benefits. The mobility hub concept forms part of the overall smart mobility concept, which includes the development and/or improvement of digital communication solutions for the purpose of providing real-time information, reserving spaces on different modes of transport, making car-sharing arrangements, etc. This will require and promote new ways of working (NWOW), including not only remote working at the mobility hub itself, but also during journeys.   B. Charleroi metro The work needed to extend the Charleroi light metro branch route to the site of the future Grand Hôpital de Charleroi (GHdC) has been examined by the bus and tram operator Opérateur de transport de Wallonie (OTW). This work will need to be integrated with the current OTW project to renovate the metro trainsets.  C. TEC, BRT, bicycles, vehicle sharing, fleet greening  Within the FAST vision, there are five particularly important projects: 1. Carpooling: create carpooling car parks at motorway interchanges and also at other potential sites, and create vehicle lanes reserved for carpools. A list of criteria for the creation of carpooling car parks has been drawn up by the Wallonia Public Service for Mobility and Infrastructure (SPW MI). It will be used to identify the necessary conditions for constructing carpooling car parks and ensuring their effective use. This list will be discussed between the SPW MI and Sofico in order to determine the feasibility of developing the proposed sites. A list of potential carpooling car parks next to motorway interchanges has been drafted by the SPW MI and will be discussed with Sofico. Two pilot projects for vehicle lanes reserved for carpools on the A4/E411 between Wavre and Brussels and between Arlon and Sterpenich were implemented in May 2019. extended to other sites. 2. Bus routes: upgrade existing routes and create new routes (mainly BRT routes) designed to provide fast links between popular destinations or intermodal hubs. Funding will be earmarked for the operating costs of these new routes and the purchase of new buses with a view to greening of the fleet. This principle is also enshrined in the new public service contract. 3. Bus lanes and corridors and new park and ride schemes to increase the speed of bus travel and make it more attractive. The technical services are responsible for reconciling the needs of operators with the latest proposals under the Infrastructure Plan 2019-2024. One solution in this respect is the introduction of multimodal platforms. The measures under this pillar of the fiche will supplement those provided for in the other two plans (Fiche 2a and Infrastructure Plan 2019-2024). 4. ITS (Intelligent Transport System): complete the PEREX 4.0 project that is currently under way with a view to improving and modernising the management of road and river infrastructure. Provide 145 innovative services for the various modes of transport and for the management of road and inland waterway traffic in order to ensure safer, more coordinated and smarter use of the transport networks. This ITS pillar particularly concerns the future accommodation of self-driving vehicles and data management (big data, open data, etc.). Detailed proposals by the will be presented during the next meeting of the working group. The measures under this pillar of the fiche will therefore supplement Sofico, namely publication of a call for tenders in relation to carpooling monitoring/penalties in late June, call for tenders in relation to a traffic management system, and a call for tenders in the area of inland waterways (automated locks), for which the specifications are to be published this summer. 5. Cycling and walking: equip Wallonia with new infrastructure where necessary and adapt existing infrastructure. Cycling infrastructure must be based on further development of the RAVeL cycle path and footpath network as a means of making quick journeys using soft modes of transport. Accessibility will be increased with a view to enabling more daily journeys to school, work and multimodal platforms.  and soft mobility. Calls for projects aimed at municipalities will be extended with a view to connecting residential areas with schools and workplaces and increasing the accessibility of the RAVeL network. Maintenance work on the network will also be stepped up, with special equipment being purchased where necessary. A project to improve lighting along the RAVeL routes is also planned. The construction of new cycle lanes and the maintenance of existing cycle lanes along the rroads will also be promoted. As regards walking, work will be carried out to build new footpaths and to redevelop and maintain existing footpaths. Demand for soft modes of transport is currently being examined in relation to road-related needs under the Infrastructure Plan 2019-2024, in order to optimise regional investment. This pillar will also be coordinated with the Walloon Cycling Plan (WaCy 3.0).  D. Dredging of inland waterways to increase their depth and width The dredging of inland waterways to increase their depth and width must be stepped up so that the modal shift of goods from road to waterway can continue to be encouraged and optimised. A funding mechanism is planned in this respect, based on a public-private partnership. This partnership should initially enable dredging down to the former bed and out to the former banks along 450 km of inland waterway in Wallonia in 2024; it will also organise and carry out the removal of sediment. Sediment removal includes the dredging itself, transport, desiccation, treatment, use and disposal in landfill where necessary. A system promoting the use of sediment, in particular through research and development, will also be established under the partnership. A percentage target will be set for the use of sediment. A financial feasibility study for the dredging and sediment management work is currently being carried out in order to set the specific targets and decide on the method to be used to seal this partnership.  E. Improved mobility to support long-term business growth around airports The two airport hubs in Wallonia (Charleroi and Liège) play a vitally important role in the rdevelopment. It is therefore important for their accessibility to be improved. Using the allocated budgets, the relevant services will therefore: - identify the infrastructure needs (improvements to existing infrastructure or construction of new infrastructure) in relation to the business zones around the airports; 146 - research alternative means of transport to the car (bus, bicycle and train), which may also involve, in the long term, constructing a driverless shuttle to serve the airports; - in the specific case of Charleroi, take into account, firstly, the economic restructuring priority in the interests , secondly, the construction of a bus shuttle or link between the airport and airport business park and the Fleurus and Luttre railway stations (which will also be redeveloped); - in the specific case of Liège, take into account the possible introduction of high-speed trains to transport freight (Carex); - prioritise, plan and complete the projects; - also pay special attention to soft and shared mobility and fuel switches.  Greening of the vehicle fleet The main measures can be summarised as follows.  The roll-out of LNG/CNG and hydrogen infrastructure will be supported, provided that the current technological cost differential can be maintained using appropriate mechanisms.  Industry-level support will be provided, in accordance with the Walloon Regional Policy Statement, to encourage the use of biogas to produce CNG and LNG. Discussions must be started with the Federal Government on setting a biogas incorporation rate in the transport sector.  Electric vehicle charging points: the Walloon Government plans to continue publishing calls for projects in order to encourage public and private players to roll out electric charging points throughout the region. The preferred mechanism is a system of repayable advances. Specific attention must be paid to ensuring sufficient coverage.  Hydrogen: a support mechanism may be established to encourage infrastructure building.  Brussels Capital Region For the region to achieve its climate targets, it must reduce emissions from the key emitting sectors. Road transport is the sector with the second highest emissions and is alone responsible for over 26% of regional GHG emissions. The regional climate ambition involves gradually decarbonising this sector through the following two types of measure. - Reducing (individual) mobility needs to reduce energy consumption. This objective will primarily be achieved by adopting and implementing the Good Move regional mobility plan as detailed in the second part o- - Improving the performance of the remaining vehicles and transitioning the vehicle stock in Brussels to zero-emission vehicles. It is mainly this type of measure that we detail below. The combustion engine, which is polluting, usually powered by fossil fuels and inefficient, has no place in the city of 2050. The government has therefore confirmed its intention to phase out diesel no later than 2030, and petrol and LPG no later than 2035 (61). During the period 2021-2030, preparations must therefore be made to implement this decision. Vehicle taxation must also be redesigned so that cars are better used and have no negative social impact. This is a tool that will be used to achieve the r under the NECP.                                                             61 This decision also features in the Good Move regional mobility plan, in measure D.5 - Phasing out combustion engines, which states that the aim in implementing this action is to reduce the vehicle fleet and use of cars in general. 147 Initiating the phase-out of combustion engines Like other large cities, the Brussels Capital Region faces specific challenges in terms of transport, particularly due to the large number of commuters. In addition, mobility needs are still largely met by individual solutions that are very carbon-intensive and emit significant amounts of air pollutants. Nitrogen dioxide (NO2), which currently exceeds the annual limit value in Brussels, is harmful to human health. When its density in the air we breathe is high, it causes respiratory problems, bronchial hyperreactivity and, especially in children, increased sensitivity of the bronchi to infection. Road transport is also the largest emitter of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) with 32% of emissions in 2015 in the Brussels Capital Region. This fine particulate matter penetrates deep into the respiratory tracts and is also a health hazard. Given these facts, the government has decided to act to improve air quality in the capital. It has therefore confirmed the ban on diesel vehicles from 2030 at the latest, and the ban on petrol and LPG vehicles from 2035. Having said that, reducing the presence of diesel engines must be made a priority in the very near future in order to immediately reduce nitrogen oxide (NOx) and fine particulate matter emissions. The transition has already been started with the implementation of the low-emission zone in 2018, which will remain in place until 2025. The aim of the low-emission zone is to reduce regional emissions of air pollutants; it may also help to reduce greenhouse gases and improve energy efficiency. The gmay lead, from a technical and legal perspective, to the extension and tightening of the low-emission zone. In consultation with stakeholders and the relevant professional sectors, and taking account of the socioeconomic and budgetary impacts and the alternative technologies available (62), the government will therefore take the following action.  In 2020, set new milestones for any type of vehicle in the low-emission zone (LEZ) for the period 2025-2035. Tighten the access criteria, incorporate the ban on diesel vehicles from 2030 and the ban on petrol and LPG vehicles from 2035 (63), and extend the scope (inclusion of the most polluting powered two-wheel vehicles from 2022, which are currently outside the scope for operational reasons).  Consider creating -Pentagon or certain areas such as shopping hubs. These ZEZs would be combined with tighter access criteria than for the LEZ, bringing forward the ban on diesel and petrol vehicles as well as on powered two-wheel vehicles, and a possible complete ban on heavy goods vehicles (taking into account any exemptions).  Introduce Pass would be regarded as an extension of the current day pass concept (64) to certain motor vehicles accessing the LEZ (permitted cars, vans and powered two-wheel vehicles). Its price could be fixed or variable depending on several parameters including fuel, weight and/or Euro standard. An operational study on incorporating this LEZ Pass should be completed in 2020.  Tighten the LEZ inspection conditions: checking of foreign vehicles by introducing mobile teams; detection of cases of particulate filter fraud, and measurement of actual emissions through the use of remote sensing technology.  Maintain or even strengthen support measures taking account of the social situation of households, such as the development of bicycle parking areas in apartment blocks and charging infrastructure, the provision of information on alternatives (mobility boutiques) or communication on the LEZ. These                                                            62 A wide-ranging consultation process was carried out in 2019 in order to determine how to phase out combustion engines. At the same time, studies were launched to assess the socioeconomic and budgetary impacts of this approach and to identify the alternative technologies available. The results of these consultations and studies will be taken into account in decision-making, in particular when determining any exemptions (whether temporary or not). 63 Non-rechargeable hybrid petrol engines and CNG engines are not affected by this tightening of the access criteria due to their environmental characteristics. Banning them, which would equate to a total ban on fossil fuel engines, may be subsequently considered, depending, in particular, on the alternative technologies available on the market and their accessibility. 64 The current day pass limited to eight uses per year for vehicles not permitted in the LEZ remains in place. 148 support measures could be further strengthened as revenue from the day pass increases. In order to support the transition of households, the gincentive.  Set up a permanent LEZ Strategic Committee, made up of independent experts, to produce recommendations on the development and adaptation of the planned restrictions.  Supporting the emergence of zero-emission vehicles In line with the ge out combustion engines from 2030, the emergence of zero-emission vehicles as an alternative for the remaining stock of vehicles needs to be supported. As a reminder, the main idea in this respect is actually to reduce, in the medium and long term, the number of private vehicles on our roads in favour of soft mobility, public transport, carpooling and car-sharing (see the Good Move plan -part). In its majority agreement 2019-2024, the government therefore decided to prioritise the development of shared low-carbon light vehicles and to promote, following an environmental and economic efficiency analysis, alternative propulsion systems to diesel and petrol, based on its mobility and environmental objectives. Vehicle taxation is a tool that will be used to achieve the targets set by the region under the NECP. The government has therefore reaffirmed its intention to conclude a cooperation agreement between the regions aimed at implementing a smart tax per kilometre for light vehicles within the metropolitan area or the entire country. Such a tax would be introduced as a replacement for road tax. Within its own area of responsibility, the glife as part of a fair and inclusive transition. Appropriate vehicle taxation should help to improve the overall energy performance of the vehicle fleet, and also achieve the aim of easing congestion in Brussels. Furthermore, the Energy Pact sets targets for the growing proportion of zero-emission vehicles among new registrations. We are including a summary of these commitments below as they will support an overall reduction in the number and use of private vehicles:  Horizon Proportion of zero-emission light vehicles among new registrations 2025 2% Targets for the public authorities (including public transport): 100% 2030 50% 2050 100%  Among these alternatives, the electric vehicles that are already available obviously come to mind. However, in the long term, other possibilities could perhaps be significant, such as hydrogen or CNG vehicles. In this context, the government will: - adapt (for the period 2021-2030 and taking into account any exemptions) the relevant regional regulations (65) in order to include:  the Energy Pact target according to which 100% of new vehicle registrations by public authorities and public transport are to be emission-free from 2025, taking into account any procurement timeframes;  the phasing out of diesel and petrol vehicles, with progressive quotas for electric vehicles being introduced or strengthened. - carry out market analyses and studies of the alternatives available for specific vehicle types (refuse collection vehicles, coaches, light-duty vehicles, recovery vehicles, etc.);                                                            65 In particular the COBRACE (Brussels Air, Climate and Energy Management Code) (Articles 2.4.5 and 2.4.6), the Decree of the Government of the Brussels Capital Region of 15 May 2014 on the exemplary role of the public authorities in terms of transport, and the Decree of 1 June 2017 on workplace travel plans. 149 - adapt regulations or introduce new ones (for the period 2021-taxis (66) and car-sharing vehicles (67), for which the transition will be easier and more important due to their role as ambassadors in the region and the distance that they travel. In this context, the Energy Pact target according to which 100% of new registrations must be emission-free from 2025 will be applied, with progressive quotas for electric vehicles once again being introduced or strengthened.  With regard to vehicle taxation, the government has decided to take the following action. - Revise the vehicle registration tax (taxe de mise en circulation  TMC) system by making it more progressive based on the environmental performance of vehicles (weight, actual power and type of fuel used) in order to discourage the purchase of vehicles not suited to use in an urban environment. The government has also reaffirmed its intention to conclude a cooperation agreement between the regions aimed at implementing a smart tax per kilometre for light vehicles within the metropolitan area or the entire country. - Revise the road tax (taxe de circulation  TC) system This new system will apply to all vehicles in Brussels and will be based on use in order to limit road congestion, particularly at peak times. The government will therefore develop its network of ANPR cameras (used for the LEZ).  Finally, in the specific case of electric vehicles, the government plans to: - boost the development of charging stations (public or private), particularly through concessions for public charging infrastructure (68) under the BENEFIC (69) project; - develop the charging infrastructure for electric vehicles to achieve the Energy Pact target of one publicly accessible charging point for every 10 electric vehicles (70); - encourage the installation of charging points at existing and new service stations; - reinforce or introduce obligations regarding the installation of charging facilities (intended for residents, workers or visitors) in private or public car parks and in new buildings or those undergoing major renovation (by at least ensuring the transposition of the new EPB Directive), with a view to achieving the target of one charging station for every 10 parking spaces.  Cooperation with the Federal Government: - develop the ; - introduce a tax on kerosene in the aviation sector.  C. Industry This sector is extremely diverse, given the large number of industries that differ greatly in terms of size and function. The trend in GHG emissions and energy consumption in this sector is closely linked to economic growth and the implementation of cross-cutting policies and measures on tax and investment.                                                             66 [axis are an interesting niche for an accelerated transition to electric vehicles. After all, they have a high consumption (average of 65,000 km/year with one shift per day to 120,000 km/year with multiple shifts), they often drive short journeys in an urban environment and their engine is often idling (Source: Clean Power for Taxis, BBL study:  https://www.bondbeterleefmilieu.be/sites/default/files/files/bbl_2017_e-taxis_rendabiliteitsstudie_tml.pdf). 67 Vehicles covered by the Decree of the Government of the Brussels Capital Region of 21 March 2013 establishing the arrangements for the use of parking spaces by operators of shared motor vehicles. 68 An initial concession is planned for 2018-2021 (minimum of 100 charging stations, i.e. 200 charging points, per year), with a second for 2022-2025 (probably with higher targets). 69 The aim of the BENEFIC project is to co-finance private charging infrastructure. 70 Target adopted in the Interfederal Energy Pact. 150 Most of the measures combine energy efficiency improvements with the introduction of specific regulatory measures, both voluntary and binding.  Federal State  Continuation and refinement of federal support for businesses under energy contracts or sectoral agreements to encourage industry to make the necessary additional effort by 2030. This assumes a level playing field within the EU in terms of constant improvement, adequate reporting, avoidance of any lock-in and rapid elimination of fossil fuel subsidies.  Flemish Region Non-ETS industry   Reinforcing and expanding the existing energy policy agreement  See point 3.2 Dimension energy efficiency  Rolling out a tailored energy efficiency policy for SMEs See point 3.2 Dimension energy efficiency  Making energy carriers greener in non-ETS industry  To make energy carriers greener in non-ETS industry by 2030, several approaches will be taken.  Efforts will mainly be directed at sustainable direct heat production, including through heat pumps and solar heating, although biomass may also play a role. However, biomass will be used as much as possible as a raw material before being burned for energy generation, in accordance with current sustainability criteria.  Secondly, when producers make natural gas greener, this can indirectly lead to a reduction in the intensity of emissions from industry.  Thirdly, further electrification of industry can result in reduced emissions (both direct and indirect). Renewable electricity that is sustainably generated, such as wind and solar energy, can be used, in whole or in part, to heat production processes, for example through initial conversion into hydrogen or synthetic methane.  Heat from geothermal energy may also have a role to play in some regions in the industrial heat supply of the future.  An economic potential study should indicate the extent to which these technologies can be used in a competitive environment for industry, which should then be followed by specific studies of the cost-benefit and the needs in terms of innovation, funding and infrastructure.  Optimising economic support instruments See point 3.2 Dimension energy efficiency  Providing transparent and aggregated information  See point 3.2 Dimension energy efficiency  We will encourage cooperation between businesses Existing learning networks can gather information on all current generation methods and opportunities for sustainable improvement in order to reduce CO2 emissions, and also on the prerequisites for achieving this 151 reduction. Through these networks, industrial businesses can pool their practical knowledge on the opportunities for reducing CO2. We will also encourage a collective approach within business parks. Group purchases can be a source of relief and generate cost benefits. A tailored approach is used to take account of the diversity within different business parks. In addition, business parks can form local or Smart Energy communities. In this approach, energy is generated locally as much as possible, for example through solar panels, wind energy, cogeneration and green heat, and is also consumed or recovered locally (waste heat). Using flexibility services such as storage or demand-side response can ensure that supply and demand are balanced as far as possible. Furthermore, information can be shared within the community on energy efficiency measures and other best practices.  Reducing N2O emissions from caprolactam production  With this measure, the two-stage approach will involve imposing special conditions in the environmental permit. The first stage consists of the installation of end-of-pipe technology and the second stage involves a feasibility study to research further measures. It will be examined whether the environmental incentive can be used for new or very specific technologies (based on the standard principles of the ). This may help to reduce greenhouse gases (N2O etc.) linked to a specific production process. Through the above measures, absolute nitrous oxide emissions will be reduced by more than 30% from 2020, compared with the level of emissions in recent years, and will therefore fall below the level of emissions from the reference year 2005. If the implementation of an additional end-of-pipe measure is technically and economically viable, it is forecast that annual emissions could be reduced by 60%, compared with the level of emissions in recent years, at the mid-way point of the period 2021-2030. If other measures prove to be technically and economically viable, further reductions (approaching 75%) will be possible by 2030 compared with the level of emissions in recent years.   Continuing efforts to reduce fluorinated greenhouse gas emissions  In response to the gauntlet laid down by Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 on fluorinated greenhouse gases (F-gases), the Flemish Action Plan for reducing F-gas emissions 2015-2020 was launched during the Flemish climate conference of 19 April 2016. The measures in this plan aim to limit F-gas emissions in the Flemish Region to 1.8 Mt CO2eq by 2020. It is also estimated in the plan that, by adopting these measures, F-gas emissions will be limited to 1.0 Mt CO2eq by 2030. Given that the technical potential is already largely available, in addition to the actions set out in the existing plan, other measures will be taken to further reduce these F-gas emissions. The measures detailed below aim to help reduce F-gas emissions in the Flemish Region to a maximum of 0.6 Mt CO2eq by 2030. In 2020, it will be assessed whether a new specific Flemish action plan for the period 2021-2030 may offer added value in terms of consolidating the new initiatives/measures below, among others. The further measures/actions needed for this purpose are primarily as follows. (1) Reinforcing economic support instruments as part of a comprehensive strategy to support the conversion to natural refrigerants The switch to natural refrigerants requires major investment. We will therefore assess the environmental measures that are currently being supported by the and that could be continued beyond 2020. We will also examine whether any other environmental measures that may make a positive contribution to reducing F-gas emissions (e.g. air-conditioning systems in large buildings and heat pumps with a low GWP value) could be supported as well. At the same time, we will ensure that available European funding is used as much as possible. 152 In addition, to aid the switch to natural refrigerants, the creation of new training centres (and/or the conversion of existing centres) with the necessary facilities for teaching about natural refrigerants will be specifically supported. (2)  Imposing additional responsibilities on specific target groups In this respect, a Green Deal will be discussed with the distribution sector in 2020, so that by 2030 the use of conventional refrigerants in this sector has been reduced to the minimum and F-gas emissions are virtually zero. In the chemical sector as well, following consultation, specific agreements will be reached at company level (through the environmental permit or otherwise) with producers of fluorinated compounds, during the production of which F-gases are emitted, so that F-gas emissions by these producers are reduced as quickly as possible to a maximum of 0.15 Mt CO2eq. Finally, based on the results of the study into the waste issues of cooling applications that involve F-gases and the identification of potential sticking points (Afvalproblematiek van F-gasbevattende koeltoepassingen en identificeren van mogelijke knelpunten), measures will be taken together with the sectors directly concerned (refrigeration sector, RECUPEL, construction sector, etc.), which should lead to a considerable increase in the current degree of recovery of refrigerants in the waste stage.  We will limit methane slip in natural gas cogeneration engines  When natural gas is burnt in cogeneration engines, some unburnt pure natural gas (CH4) ends up in the flue gas and therefore in the atmosphere. In the last few years, in the Flemish GHG emissions inventory, 3-4 kt of CH4, i.e. 75-100 kt CO2eq, have been attributed to this methane slip, and the trend is upwards. Technical measures are available to limit this methane slip, either through design improvements or through the installation of methane oxidation catalysts. Limiting this methane slip (and therefore emissions) has become a focal point in several Member States over the last few years, and this could also become part of a European methane strategy. In the Environment Departmentresources have been included for undertaking a limited study to further investigate: (1) the technical measures that could be taken, and (2) the policies that can be developed. This measure will also cover natural gas cogeneration engines in the agricultural sector.   We will minimise methane emissions due to natural gas transport and distribution In natural gas transport and distribution activities, a small amount of the natural gas escapes in the form of pure methane. For a number of years, Fluxys and Fluvius have been taking steps to minimise these emissions. Over the period 2021-2030, these measures will be continued and reinforced where necessary. In mid-2019, Fluxys produced an action plan for reducing methane emissions from its activities. Through this plan, Fluxys will reduce its methane emissions to a maximum of 46 kt CO2eq by 2025, which will be a significant reduction (±0.1 Mt CO2eq) from the period 2013-2017. Other measures will also be discussed with Fluvius.  Brussels Capital Region In principle, large industrial emitters are already covered by a specific system for reducing GHG emissions: the Emissions Trading System (71) (ETS). However, few plants in the Brussels Capital Region are included in this programme, with some large GHG-emitting plants actually being excluded, such as the Neder-Over-Heembeek waste incinerator and turbine plant, wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) and the turbojet electricity generation unit in Ixelles.                                                            71 The European Union Emissions Trading System (EU-ETS) is a CO2 emission allowances mechanism implemented within the European Union in the context of its ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. 153 As a result, the necessary reduction in direct GHG emissions also applies to these large-scale plants. Given the level of investment in this type of plant and the period of validity of their environmental permits (15 years), it will also be necessary to plan, inform and discuss in advance with operators how to avoid inappropriate or unnecessary investments given the regional targets. Waste incineration is an activity that is responsible for significant GHG emissions. Furthermore, the Resources and Waste Management Plan (PGRD), which was approved by the government on 22 November 2018, aims to reduce the production of household and business waste by 20% by 2030.  The PGRD therefore focuses on the issue of economical and responsible consumption upstream, as well as on the traditional management of waste downstream. This requires new collaborative economy and sharing practices at intermediate levels. The PGRD has three general objectives:  ingrain the switch to more sustainable and circular consumption practices;  maximise the conservation and recovery of materials, if possible locally;  steer the supply sector towards circular practices. The PGRD 2018-2023 and beyond is therefore organised into seven strategic objectives that are also priorities, with each one being broken down into several operational objectives that in turn comprise measures to be implemented. Finally, following recent developments, European legislation now requires the separate collection of bio-waste by 2023 at the latest (72). With regard to the European targets (50% by 2020, 55% by 2025 and 65% by 2030), particularly those for bio-waste, the government has committed to reducing the regional flows destined for incineration over the next decade. The Regional Policy Statement also plans to start phasing out the incinerator. At wastewater treatment plants, a significant quantity of biomethane is produced during the treatment process. Methane is a warming gas and a source of energy. Optimised management of this biogas is essential to regional climate policy efforts. Turbojet units are electricity generating plants. They are designed to respond to consumption peaks and therefore to support the local grid in the event of an unexpected rise in demand or the failure of core generating plants. The electricity is generated using an aircraft jet engine capable of being started and reaching its full operating power very quickly (73). In the past, there were three turbojet units operating in the region (74). The Schaerbeek and Buda-Machelen units stopped generating in 2007 and 2017 respectively. Only the unit in Ixelles remains, which runs for a few hours every year on kerosene, which is high in carbon dioxide. Finally, the long-term planning exercises (energy, climate (75), air, waste, etc.) need to be repeated at an accelerated rate in the coming years. The Governance Regulation actually provides for these exercises to be repeated at least every 10 years. For its part, the Paris Agreement provides for global stocktakes (76), i.e. regular assessments that may, where appropriate, lead to the current plan being adapted and new measures being adopted with a view to increasing the level of ambition. In this context, the fact that the environmental permit for such key plants is granted for a period of 15 years can create lock-in effects, which means that discussions need to take place on adapting the legal framework of these environmental permits. With regard to such plants, the government needs to take specific action as follows. - Establish a long-term phased timetable for the adaptation of the Neder-Over-Heembeek regional facility taking into account the gradual reduction in flows destined for incineration, while maintaining self-                                                           72 Circular Economy Package  Waste Directive - Article 22. 73 Source: Fédération Belge des Entreprises Électriques et Gazières  FEBEG (Federation of Belgian Electricity and Gas Companies). 74 Schaerbeek, Volta-Ixelles and Buda-Machelen. 75  76 The global stocktake provided for in Article 14 of the Paris Agreement is a core element of the agreement. It aims to  154 sufficiency in terms of the Brussels Capital Region managing its own waste and also public control over this strategic facility. The study that will provide a framework for this adaptation will be conducted in 2020 and will focus on reducing emissions, recovering the residual waste flows for energy generation, waste imported into the Brussels Capital Region, and the socioeconomic and environmental effects of this conversion (energy generation, indirect impacts resulting from changes to waste collection, etc.). The government will study the phasing out of this facility, which is desirable in order to meet the rGHG emission obligations. As a result of this phasing out, the benefits deriving from the green certificates granted to the incinerator will be used to achieve the objectives of the PGRD and the Regional Circular Economy Programme (PREC) (77). Green certificates will no longer be granted to the incinerator. - Plan to ban the generation of electricity using petroleum products with the exception of emergency generators, while ensuring security of supply. - Drastically reduce the use of flaring (which burns surplus biogas) in all (future) plants, in consultation with their operators. An increase in storage capacity without reducing the safety of these sites will be considered where necessary. - Develop the legal framework for granting environmental permits to avoid lock-in effects that would make it impossible to meet the rdecarbonisation and energy transition commitments and targets. - Achieve its climate objectives by respecting the hierarchy of waste treatment methods, namely: recycling, material recovery, energy recovery, and finally landfill.  D. (Residential) buildings Federal State See point 3.2(ii).  Flemish Region See point 3.2 Dimension energy efficiency.  Walloon Region See point 3.2 Dimension energy efficiency.  Brussels Capital Region The buildings sector, which is the main sector responsible for direct GHG emissions in Brussels (44% of emissions come from residential buildings), is marked by very high use of fossil energy sources (coal, heating oil and natural gas) to meet most heat requirements (heating, domestic hot water and cooking). These fossil energy sources are very carbon-rich. They therefore have a significant impact on climate change. In view of the challenges and targets set, strong measures must be adopted to reduce the emissions of these installations, together with measures encouraging energy sobriety (covered in point 2.2.1). After analysing whether the timetable currently indicated in this document can be brought forward, the government will develop a strategy aimed at gradually phasing out heating powered by fossil fuels in new buildings or major renovations. It will introduce social support measures for people on low incomes. In addition, communication is a key element in explaining the coherence and impacts of these short- and medium-term measures. Prohibitive measures and financial support (including incentives) will therefore be accompanied by significant communication with the public and professionals.                                                            77 The PREC was adopted by the Government on 10 March 2016. It is being managed by Bruxelles Environnement, together with Impulse, Innoviris and the Agence Bruxelles Propreté (Clean Brussels Agency). For more information: https://environnement.brussels/thematiques/transition-de-leconomie/programme-regional-en-economie-circulaire 155 In the specific case of the Brussels Capital Region, where there are many tenants and co-owners, special ese particular groups.  sets out measures for all buildings in Brussels. However, these measures will not necessarily apply to listed buildings given their specific circumstances. The government nevertheless wants this specific stock of buildings to contribute to the regional emissions reduction effort. In 2021, Patrimoine.brussels (authority responsible for monuments and sites) will propose a specific action plan in close collaboration with Bruxelles Environnement (the Brussels Environment Authority), which will eventually be incorporated into the strategy to reduce the environmental impact of existing buildings in the Brussels Capital Region. NB: Some of the measures set out below are also contained in the draft strategy to reduce the environmental impact of existing buildings in the Brussels Capital Region. They are also included here given the relevance of their direct impact on the decarbonisation of the buildings sector, whether they concern existing or new buildings.  Starting to phase out coal from 2021 Coal, which is extremely harmful to air quality and therefore to health, and which significantly drives the greenhouse effect (69% more emissions than natural gas), still remains a method of heating the homes of certain groups in Brussels (mainly vulnerable ones). It is estimated that 0.05% of homes are heated primarily using coal, and that less than 2% use coal as a supplementary heating source. In terms of energy, coal accounted for 0.11% of total consumption in 2017 (78) (in 97% of cases, it is used to fuel supplementary heating and in 3% of cases for primary heating). These figures may seem insignificant but, in terms of fine particulate matter, they account for 31% of residential emissions of PM2.5 (79). In view of the climate and public health issues, this situation cannot be allowed to continue beyond 2030. The government will therefore: - enshrine in legislation a ban on installing appliances running on coal from 2021; - first put in place support measures such as an energy incentive enabling the Brussels inhabitants concerned to acquire a system that is less harmful to the environment, provided that their coal-fired system is destroyed.  Starting to phase out heating oil from 2025 Heating oil is still extensively used for heating and domestic hot water in the region. It is used in 16% of boilers and emits 32% more carbon dioxide than natural gas. Yet lower-carbon or renewable alternatives are available. Studies and feedback from the field show that heating systems and boilers in particular have a much longer lifespan than other equipment in buildings. At the very least, owners tend to keep them for as long as possible while they work, regardless of their energy performance. It can therefore be assumed that a heating oil boiler installed today and receiving a minimum amount of maintenance will still be operating in 28-30 years (and possibly even 35 years). In view of the issues, the coming period should therefore be used to progressively phase out heating oil for heating, with particular attention being paid to large-scale heating oil plants in schools and public buildings. In this context, the government undertakes to: - enshrine in legislation a ban on the installation of heating and/or domestic hot water production appliances running on heating oil from 2025;                                                            78 Source: Regional energy balance. 79 Source: Inventory of pollutants, 2017. Bruxelles Environnement. PM2.5 is fine particulate matter that is a major cause of poisoning in the airways and therefore poses a real danger to human health. 156 - from 2021, offer a specific incentive for replacing a heating and/or domestic hot water production system running on heating oil with a better alternative in terms of air quality and GHG emissions, which may be modulable depending on the replacement option chosen (energy-efficient heat pump, natural gas condensing boiler, etc.), and for removing the heating oil tank (in accordance with Brussels legislation on soil pollution), provided that the heating oil system is destroyed.  Starting to phase out natural gas from 2030 Achieving carbon neutrality means, as indicated in the Energy Pact, that by the middle of the century we will no longer use fossil energy sources for our heat requirements. Given the observed lifespan of equipment (20-25 years for equipment running on gas), we therefore also need to plan for the progressive phasing out of natural gas from 2030. To this end, the government undertakes to: - examine the possibility of a ban on installing cooking, heating and domestic hot water production appliances running on natural gas or butane/propane from 2030 in consultation with the sector and paying particular attention to the issue of energy dependence and the economic and social impacts caused; - discontinue support for the generation of green electricity from natural gas-fired cogeneration (currently guaranteed by green certificates) from 2030; - consider the possibility of decarbonising gas and developing renewable heat in Brussels; - work with stakeholders in the sector, the Federal Government and the other regions to develop by 2030 a strategy and an action plan aimed at evolving the natural gas distribution network by 2050 on a case-by-case basis according to the renewable potential.  Promoting decarbonised energy carriers rimary energy. As a result, gas consumed to produce heat is favoured over electricity. Indeed, the calculation based on the primary energy coefficient penalises electricity given its conversion in a power plant. A de facto advantage is therefore granted to natural gas, which has a lower primary energy coefficient. Given the energy transition challenges, the situation needs to be rebalanced, otherwise there is a risk of maintaining the status quo in favour of gas for many years to come through the EPB regulations. The government undertakes to: - adapt the primary energy coefficient for electricity in the EPB method.  Cooperation with the Federal Government: - (In the very near future), standardise the VAT rate for coal (up from 12% to 21%) as part of the reduction in (indirect) subsidies to fossil fuels indicated in the Energy Pact. - Reduce VAT for demolition/rebuilding operations, on the basis that regional policies will prioritise quantifying the environmental cost of operations in order to assess their relevance. - Adapt and gradually tighten product standards, with an eventual ban on the sale of coal-fired heating systems and heating and domestic hot water production systems running on heating oil.  E. Agriculture Flemish Region Agriculture means all activities where land is used to produce plants and animals, mainly for human consumption (basic food needs). It also includes primary forms of production that do not directly use land. The emissions 157 inventory and this climate plan also include offshore fishing iagricultural sector forms part of an agri-food chain with multiple links, both upstream and downstream of the farming operation. This chapter focuses on the agricultural production link in this agri-food chain. Neither the demand side of the market nor the other agri-food links on the supply side (ETS or non-ETS) are included in this chapter. This approach does not change the fact that a comprehensive approach to the chain is the best way of maximising use of the emissions reduction potential in food consumption and supply.  The policy options and associated measures for non-energy emissions in the agricultural sector are as follows:  Animal production: o reduction in enteric emissions (methane); o reduction in emissions from manure storage and management (methane, nitrous oxide).  Plant production: o reduction in soil emissions as a result of higher nitrogen efficiency (nitrous oxide); o closure of cycles/recovery of by-products.  Continuation of efforts to make the fisheries sector more sustainable.  Cross-cutting measures in the agricultural sector: o post-2020 common agricultural policy; o cooperation in the supply chain; o integrated approach to research, innovation and dissemination of knowledge.  Animal production Livestock farming is the main source of GHG emissions in the agricultural sector. Changing the size and composition of the herd and also the GHG emissions per animal or per unit produced will help to achieve the The general trend of moderating consumption of animal products (including beef and pork), which began in the last decade, will continue. A reduction in demand will lead to falling supply given that this trend on the demand side is occurring not only in Belgium, but also throughout the single market/customs union. On the supply side, the European Commission predicts that pig and cattle stocks will fall by 2030. The nutrient emission rights system will be assessed and overhauled so that it makes more of a contribution to the climate, water quality and air quality targets.  Reduction in enteric emissions  Optimising feed rations and feed efficiency as well as improving farm management can reduce methane emissions from cattle. More progress is needed in areas such as feed efficiency, feed additives and longevity of cattle. (Enteric emissions from cattle) agreement signed on 29 March 2019 by the Flemish Minister for the Environment, Nature and Agriculture, the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, the ILVO and various partners from the cattle industry as a whole. By signing this agreement, the partners have committed to achieving the enteric emissions target by 2030. The agreement aims to roll out measures in the sector and is based around five main themes: (1) developing the beef market; (2) improving the management of herds and animals at farm level; (3) adapting the management of animal feed; (4) options in terms of genetics and selection, and (5) monitoring and assurance of measures. There will also be an emphasis on research. From 2021, the policy framework implemented will be reviewed every year and the reduction in greenhouse gases will be reviewed every two years in order to determine 158 whether the top-down measures are on target to 2030. Further measures will be adopted if the targets are not on track in 2025.   Reduction in emissions from manure storage and management  By fermenting manure on pig and dairy farms, methane emissions from manure storage can be substantially reduced and at the same time produce biogas for green heat and electricity. This technique is already being applied on around 80 dairy farms (2017) and is being tested on pig farms (VLAIO [Flemish Agency for Innovation and Entrepreneurship] LA project Pocket Power). If viable in economic, functional and technical terms, this technique could be implemented on more pig and dairy farms. External storage of liquid livestock effluents could also be encouraged. This not only reduces emissions from the storage of the manure, but also improves homogenisation of the manure so that it can be better applied, which in turn reduces soil emissions. This can be combined with small-scale anaerobic digesters. There are several methods other than small-scale anaerobic digestion for reducing methane emissions from manure storage and management, namely covering or crust formation, composting (e.g. composting solid manure and solid fractions after separation of the liquid manure), aerobic treatment, manure separation and composting, acidification of liquid manure and other forms of fertilisation. We will therefore obtain analyses and advice on high-quality fertilisers through certified advisers. Emissions from manure storage and spreading can also be prevented through Smart Farming and precision spreading. By applying an input/output balance at farm level, the cycle of nutrients on a farm can be better identified and losses can be tackled where they occur. This is one of the aspects that will be considered in the climate analysis of the VLAIO Klimrek project.  Plant production  Reduction in soil emissions as a result of higher nitrogen efficiency Current nitrogen losses in the agricultural sector have a direct and indirect impact on the quality of the environment (greenhouse gases, acidification, eutrophication). Nitrogen emissions to the air and water from animal and plant production and biomass processing can be reduced through targeted measures. The sixth action programme implementing the Nitrates Directive (MAP 6 [Manure Action Plan], 2019-2022) includes the following measures:  low-protein rations, own protein production and protein from waste flows for animal feed;  precision farming: the right dose at the right time in the right place;  more efficient nitrogen absorption by adapting crops (selection, new techniques, etc.) and using crop rotation (e.g. with legume crops);  reduction in the use of chemical fertilisers by adapting crop rotation and encouraging the use of alternatives to chemical fertilisers;  transition in fertiliser processing from nutrient removal to nutrient recovery and restriction of nitrogen losses. Other practical research will incorporate new knowledge and support the choice of the most efficient measures. Future action programmes under the Nitrates Directive will also focus on improving nitrogen efficiency and, if possible, reducing the processes that release nitrous oxide.  Closure of cycles/recovery of secondary flows Agriculture already plays an important role in the recovery and use of secondary flows. This role will be further reinforced and extended to 2030. 159 Anaerobic digestion is a key way of recovering manure by transforming it into green energy (biogas, biomethane) and digestate. Researchers are also examining to what extent digestate can be used as an alternative to mineral fertilisers. Plant and animal waste streams (e.g. meat-and-bone meal) will also be used as much as possible in the agricultural and horticultural sectors as animal feed, to improve soil structure and soil fertility, as an energy source or in other applications. This also applies to marine secondary flows (e.g. recovery of crab, prawn and mussel shells). Good cooperation between producers and users of secondary flows and appropriate legislation allowing products deriving from these secondary flows to be used are of paramount importance in this respect.  Continuation of efforts to make the fisheries sector more sustainable The environment and the climate are key priorities for the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF). The range of measures to protect the environment and transition to a low-carbon economy in offshore fishing include:  investment in fishing vessels that will also contribute to energy efficiency (LED lighting, on-board insulation);  improvement of fishing gear in order to increase selectivity, reduce towing power and reduce damage to the seabed;  optimisation of engines/generators and other propulsion mechanisms of fishing vessels;  development of sustainable and integrated farming systems in aquaculture (sea- and land-based) and innovative aquaculture research (e.g. cultivation of algae) that could have a beneficial impact on the climate. Even if such measures do not directly improve the non-ETS climate score of Flanders, they may further reduce our overall climate impact. In cooperation with the ILVO, the Belgian fishing fleet has developed a sustainability label (Valduvis) for fishing levels. In addition, research efforts are being directed at improving general knowledge and protecting the aquatic environment. All of this is in line with the common fisheries policy. A new provides for active research into fishing techniques and alternative energy sources.   Cross-cutting measures In the agricultural sector, tackling the climate challenge requires the resources (in terms of funding, human resources, knowledge and research, cooperation relations, etc.) of the various governments and other social players (businesses, banks, general public, etc.) to be targeted at the specific climate objectives. It is vital that governance is aimed by design at implementing, monitoring and adjusting the necessary instruments. It is for that reason that the measures concern use of the post-2020 common agricultural policy, cooperation based on new economic models, and research, innovation and dissemination of knowledge. Other climate measures may be incorporated, particularly in the Flemish environment, manure and energy policy.   Post-2020 common agricultural policy On 1 June 2018, the European Commission published its proposal for a regulation on the future common agricultural policy (CAP). The timetable of the implementing regulations and delegated regulations is not yet known. As the new CAP (2021-2027) is implemented in the region, we will adopt the measures and instruments needed to reduce GHG emissions in the agricultural sector. Income support will be linked to the provision of public services and environmental benefits through preconditions (climate, environment, public health, animal and plant health, and animal well-being) and eco-schemes, as far as possible and depending on the results. Within the limits of the new CAP, these could include, 160 for example, increased storage of carbon in agricultural land, soil and grassland kept carbon rich, efficient management of nutrients to prevent nitrogen and phosphorous losses and to improve air and water quality, sustainable water management, drought control, and production, storage and distribution of renewable energy. When implementing the post-2020 CAP in the region, agri-environmental and climate measures will be reinforced to achieve the environmental, climate, biodiversity and landscape objectives of farmers. In addition, under the new CAP, the Flemish Agricultural Investment FuAgricole  VLIF) will be completely overhauled so that it becomes a forward-looking entrepreneurial fund. Investment policy will focus on innovative production that is environmentally and climate friendly. The selection method used for all support applications will be adapted so that investments that make the greatest contribution to reducing pressure on the environment and mitigating climate change (highest reduction in GHG emissions per euro of investment aid) and to adapting to this change will be ranked the highest. The efficiency of measures, the progress made and the financial implementation of the new VLIF will be closely monitored. Coupled income support under the CAP will be gradually abolished by 2027 at the latest and replaced with a sustainable alternative in order to offset the loss of income support and achieve the climate objectives on which the livestock farmers concerned are focusing their efforts.  Cooperation in the supply chain  To achieve a transition in the agri-food chain, close cooperation between all partners is necessary. The 2016 Climate Change Conference showed that the major players in the supply chain are certainly prepared to make this happen. Flemish agriculture and horticulture form the basic link in a much larger agri-food chain that has numerous links extending from the supply of raw materials, other materials and machinery to farmers through to processing and retail sales. Knowledge institutions, lenders, education, interest groups, social organisations, government and other stakeholders also play a vital role in this extended chain. One crucial factor for a successful transition is that efforts, innovation and investment aimed at reducing the carbon footprint of foodstuffs are correctly rewarded by the market. Horizontal and vertical cooperation within the supply chain is crucial for ensuring that supply is properly aligned with demand (or expected demand). This leads to improved use of market opportunities, less food waste, risk spreading, etc. Some types of cooperation and agreement can result in new revenue models and other climate funding mechanisms.  Integrated approach to research, innovation and dissemination of knowledge  Research resources will mainly be used to support continued transformation and innovation in the agricultural sector, particularly in the areas of cost-effectiveness, environmental pressures, climate, agro-ecology, short supply chains, biodiversity and scalability. The began in 2019, through which, based on knowledge gained and the development and use of a climate analysis for holdings, achievable climate measures can be introduced on holdings, with farmers then being guided and monitored individually or in groups. Expertise for Agriculture and Climate (ELK), in cooperation with other knowledge institutions, can play a major coordinating role in this respect. It is vital that farmers have the knowledge and know-how needed to adapt their operational management so that it is more environmentally friendly. That is why the focus is on supporting farmers, raising their awareness and informing them about the interaction between agriculture and climate change, the role that agriculture can play in the fight against climate change, agro-ecological principles, existing climate-related (support) measures, the impact on other environmental aspects, and a cost-benefit analysis of climate friendly agricultural practices.  161 Walloon Region Development strategies  GHG and NH3 energy balances at farm level (DECIDE tool) The Walloon Air and Climate Agency (AwAC) and the Walloon Agricultural Research Centre (Centre wallon de Recherches agronomiques  CRA-W) have worked together to develop a calculator that accurately indicates the balance of energy consumption and GHG and NH3 emissions at farm level. The DECIDE tool is still being developed, but is already available for use in Wallonia. Once a balance has been calculated, specific recommendations can be made and discussed, particularly with agricultural advisers, about optimising the use of inputs (energy and other), limiting losses (economic impact) and reducing the environmental impact of farm activities.  Afforestation, planting of woody elements and agroforestry The afforestation potential in Wallonia is relatively limited. Over a third of the region is already covered with forest. However, there is still potential in agricultural areas by replanting hedges along the edges of plots, planting trees on grassland and developing meadow orchards. These steps can help to tackle a number of different challenges: production of biomass; increase in carbon sinks; reinforcement of the ecological network, and improvement of biodiversity and section on adapting to climate change).  Development of the biomethanisation process in the agricultural sector Biomethanisation is a technology that converts organic matter into methane gas and fertiliser. On farms, organic matter of both animal and plant origin is available at all stages of farming. This process is particularly interesting because of the quality of the fertiliser produced: the nitrogen that fertilises soil is partly mineralised by the process. In its Regional Policy Statement, the government proposes to encourage biomethanisation in order to improve waste management, by supporting farmers who produce enough energy to power a local network (village, hamlet, business). Point 3.1.2 on renewable energy proposes measures in this respect.  F. LULUCF Flemish Region In order to develop and implement an effective and coherent LULUCF policy, a number of policy initiatives are needed, which are explained step-by-step below.  Development of a comprehensive LULUCF emissions inventory and the associated carbon monitoring system The current Flemish GHG emissions inventory for LULUCF is based on a fixed monitoring network of around 6,800 reference points where the land use is monitored. To determine the carbon content of the soil in each land use category (field, forest, grassland, wetland, etc.) and to monitor how this changes, the best available information in Flemish studies and literature is currently used for each soil type. above-ground biomass and volumes of harvested timber are also taken into account. This approach is in line with the definitions and requirements of the IPCC and is currently the best possible approach given the information that is available. As the current methodology uses fixed coefficients for the change in carbon stocks in the various land use categories, the GHG emissions inventory cannot monitor the effects of current or future efforts to increase carbon storage. An effective carbon monitoring system is therefore needed for the emissions inventory for the period 2021-2030, with this system giving a detailed view of the change in soil carbon and production and harvesting of timber, among other elements.  162 Soil carbon monitoring network A detailed knowledge of Flemish soils and wetlands is vitally important for ensuring optimum monitoring of the policy effects and the actual change in carbon fluxes and carbon stocks at Flemish level. To overcome the current reporting limits, we are working on a soil carbon monitoring network. The specific issues that must be taken into account in developing this network are: - quantifying the effects of a (sudden) change in land use category, in particular deforestation or conversion of grassland into arable land, on the underlying soil carbon content; - identifying the impact of the type of management on the carbon content and mapping the change in carbon stored in the soil of grassland; - identifying the carbon concentrations in the soil for the various types of land cover (excluding paving).  Improvement of data collection and monitoring of timber production  In order to properly understand the storage of carbon in wood products and the harvesting and use of those wood products (sawn timber, wood panels, paper, energy, etc.), a system of monitoring timber production at Flemish level (volumes, types of timber, etc.) needs to be developed.  Preparation of a LULUCF action plan with projections, based on an evaluation of the current situation and a calculation of the effect of potential policy strategies on carbon stocks The LULUCF policy can use three approaches to protect or increase carbon stocks: (1) Focus management on the carbon of a land use category Where the land use, vegetation or land cover remains unchanged, the management and use of the soil can have a significant impact on carbon storage. Carefully managing the unpaved part of land cover, adding small landscape elements and buffer strips, adapting soil cultivation and crop rotation, incorporating crop residues, extensifying management, rewetting grassland and other steps can all ensure the preservation or development of carbon stocks. Conversely, ploughing and renewing grassland, soil erosion, drought, drainage of wetlands, overly intensive arable crops and other aspects can lead to carbon losses. (2) Encourage a change in land use to increase carbon storage Switching from one land use category to another will change the carbon content of the soil and any aerial biomass. Changes in land use such as afforestation (where spontaneous), rewetting, conversion of arable land to grassland (where extensive), management of nature and reduction of land cover (with paving) generally lead to increased carbon storage.  (3) Slow the change in land use resulting in a loss of carbon Cultivation of land, deforestation, conversion of grassland to arable land and new land cover are all examples of changes in land use that are often accompanied by a fall in carbon stocks. When land use categories are changed, carbon losses usually occur much more quickly than building new carbon stocks. The priority is therefore to avoid such changes in order to protect existing stocks (in forests, grassland, wetland, etc.). When it comes to offsetting legal offers, owners must be fairly compensated. We are in the process of developing an action plan to shape LULUCF policy for the period 2021-2030. As a result, various long-term strategies are being prepared, within which the consequences of policy options (existing and additional) on carbon stocks in Flemish soil and biomass are being systematically defined in terms of quantity wherever possible. Based on these projections, the action plan will examine the policy efforts needed to safeguard and actively manage Flemish carbon stocks in order to comply with the no-debit rule for the period 2021-2030. 163 Below is a qualitative explanation of how the above principles can be reflected in spatial policy, agricultural policy, forest and nature policy, and materials policy, and how they will impact on the Flemish LULUCF carbon balance.   Reduction in additional land cover, depaving and management of unpaved land cover  Land cover, particularly the paving of different types of soil, leads to relatively high carbon losses. The extent of these losses can be limited in three ways: - reducing the use of additional land; - reducing or limiting paving in current and future land cover; - designing and managing unpaved land cover in order to increase carbon storage. The strategic vision for the Spatial Policy Plan for Flanders (Plan de politique spatiale pour la Flandre/Beleidsplan Ruimte Vlaanderen  BRV) includes the objective of reducing the average daily increase in land cover to 0 hectares y has the lowest carbon stocks, net emissions are expected in this category.  Achieving the objectives of the strategic vision should enable carbon losses to be gradually reduced compared with current trends. Not achieving those objectives will result in even higher emissions due to the increased land cover. Carbon losses can be further reduced by achieving the ambition of the strategic vision to ensure that the remaining increase in land cover does not increase the total cover rate, with an effective carbon monitoring system being introduced for the purpose of detection. Depaving open spaces and land cover, as well as blue and green corridors in our towns and villages, should help to increase carbon storage in land cover. Encouraging the management of unpaved land cover (gardens, parks, public and private spaces, etc.) also offers carbon storage opportunities. Environmental policy supports the development and sharing of knowledge so that Flanders can build up a practice of cutting-edge projects in this area in cooperation with local authorities and developers. The focus will also be on depaving public space. The agricultural, nature and forest uses will fall by at least 20% by 2050 compared with 2015. When the BRV is drawn up, the impact on Flemish carbon stocks will be taken into account, and the necessary measures will be adopted to limit the impact of spatial development on the Flemish LULUCF balance.   Increased carbon storage in agriculture and horticulture In addition to measures to reduce agricultural emissions, which are covered by the ESR Regulation (Regulation 2018/842) (see point 3.1.1.3), the agricultural and horticultural sector also has an important responsibility with regard to the carbon stored in the soil. Indeed, carbon stocks in arable land and cultivated grassland are steadily declining in Flanders. However, this means that there is considerable potential to reduce carbon losses and increase carbon storage in agricultural land. A higher carbon content is also an excellent adaptation measure because it improves soil quality and increases resistance to drought and erosion. The agricultural sector can reduce carbon losses through the following policies and associated measures.  1. Protecting carbon stocks A constant plot of grassland that is not often renewed (ploughing and immediate re-sowing) stores carbon until its saturation point is reached after a few decades. When grassland is ploughed and converted into arable land, carbon stocks are quickly lost (approximately twice as fast as they were accrued). As a result, to protect existing carbon stocks, it is important to limit the ploughing of grassland and ensure that grassland plots remain constant. 164 Compensating for ploughed grassland with new plots (see the permanent grassland scheme) will lead to net emissions in the short term, because the carbon takes time to build up in the new land.  2. Promoting carbon storage Every year, part of the organic matter in soil is converted into CO2 and nutrients through natural decomposition and mineralisation processes, which therefore have to be compensated for by adding fresh organic matter. It is only once this loss has been compensated for and more stable organic matter has been gradually built up that net storage occurs. Farmers can take a combination of measures on arable land to maintain or increase carbon stocks, such as crop rotation using crops with more green cover, cereals or permanent crops, adding stable organic matter in the form of organic fertilisers (e.g. manure, compost), or agroforestry.  This requires an integrated policy framework to remove the obstacles in the current legislative framework (e.g. on local use of organic waste streams through farm composting) and to focus on the adaptability of the appropriate measures. Efforts should be made in particular to ensure that fertilisation practices are compatible with increasing the carbon content. This work should be supported by targeted (practical) research into the potential and practical feasibility of measures aimed at increasing carbon storage in agricultural land. There is increasing competition for biomass, i.e. its application to soil to increase the carbon content or its removal for bioenergy, biofuels and bioeconomy. When managing biomass streams, a climate assessment must always be made that also takes account of carbon storage in the soil. The quality of organic matter added to soil is a key point as this should obviously not have any impact on other environmental aspects or lead to net emissions of greenhouse gases.  3. Using carbon storage As the Flemish Region implements the new common agricultural policy (2021-2027), the necessary instruments and measures will be used to achieve the climate objectives in the agricultural sector. The Flemish LULUCF balance is a key point in this respect. Income support will be linked to the provision of public services and environmental benefits through preconditions (climate, environment, public health, animal and plant health, and animal well-being) and eco-schemes, as far as possible and depending on the results. These could include, for example, increased storage of carbon in agricultural land and soil and grassland kept carbon rich. Agri-environmental and climate measures as well as VLIF resources (non-remunerative investments in water and soil management) may also be used to encourage carbon storage in agricultural land. In addition to the CAP instruments, new market-based funding mechanisms may be developed and used to increase carbon storage in the soil and aerial biomass (see point 3.1.1.1.6.3).   Increased carbon storage in forests and nature  Deforestation is a major source of emissions in the LULUCF sector. However, new forestation increases carbon storage, although the process is slow. Ancient grassland also has very carbon-rich soil, which sometimes contains even more carbon than forest soil. In general, however, the LULUCF policy is that avoiding deforestation is more efficient than compensating for deforestation through new forestation. Natural and semi-natural grassland and wetland also contain high quantities of carbon. It is therefore better to protect those carbon stocks to achieve the LULUCF objective.  o Prevention of deforestation and loss of ancient grassland The most obvious measure for complying with the no-debit rule is to protect existing carbon stocks by minimising emissions. The management of natural and semi-natural grassland, forest and wetland could become more focused. Existing valuable forests will be safeguarded as far as possible, and rapid and effective forest compensation will be granted. Protecting ancient grassland is also a key challenge in this context. 165  o Increased carbon storage by creating additional forests and natural spaces By 2030, 10,000 additional hectares of forest will have been created in Flanders, with 4,000 hectares by 2024. Investments will also be made to ensure a net increase in high-quality natural spaces. The focus will be on achieving the conservation objectives under the Natura 2000 policy, and also on creating natural spaces with significant carbon storage potential. Coordination with integrated water management and adaptation to climate change is also a core principle. By 2024, 20,000 additional hectares of nature will be under efficient management. At the same time, preventing natural fires (in forests and more generally, for example, on moorland) through appropriate monitoring and surveillance must also be a point of focus. Fires disrupt the accumulation of carbon in the soil and vegetation, and release large quantities of CO2.  o Forest management For existing forests, a comparison of the observed carbon stock/emissions with an ex ante reference level will determine whether Member States have an emission credit or debit. The management/exploitation of existing forests (without deforestation or afforestation) during the period 2000-2009 will be decisive. If the management does not change, no significant credits or debits will be generated for this category. More intensive exploitation, such as quicker rotation, could lead to a debit in this land use category, whilst a more extensive approach could generate credits.  o Increased carbon storage through integrated water management, development and rewetting A large proportion of the ancient wetlands and marshes in Flanders was dried out during the 20th century. As with ancient forests and grassland, it is better, in terms of carbon storage, to maintain existing wetlands than to replace them with wetlands elsewhere. In cooperation with water authorities, we are restoring the natural dynamic in valley areas. We are maximising use of the storage capacity in stream and river landscapes, and we are creating further natural wetlands where necessary. We are in the process of drawing up a specific programme to restore and develop wetlands (where degraded) for the purposes of water management, development of nature, carbon storage and a climate buffer. Several policy instruments, which were not exclusively designed for this purpose, are encouraging carbon storage through rewetting. For example, the regional conservation objectives include the goal of restoring wet vegetation such as wet moorland, peatlands and swamp forests. The Sigma plan will improve the resistance of Flanders to flooding of the Scheldt and its tributaries. The space given over to natural floodplains will also allow rewetting and therefore carbon storage in the wet soil. The Leie River Restoration Project aims to restore wet landscapes along the Leie. In addition, a standard assessment framework will be developed that can be used by all water authorities and the Agency for Nature and Forests (Agentschap voor Natuur en Bos  ANB) to develop and advise on stream and floodplain restoration projects. The Flanders Environment Agency (Vlaamse Milieumaatschappij) is trying, wherever possible, to restore the natural state of watercourses and river valleys through ecological restoration. In addition to increasing resilience and biodiversity, work such as the remodelling of watercourses will also increase carbon storage. Preventing certain watercourses that are under threat from drying out may also help. Green and blue corridors are being created as part of integrated projects in specific areas. In addition to the examples given, rewetting projects should also be considered in the broader context of integrated water management, as this will create more space for groundwater and surface water. The development of key areas of interest and also the expansion of all stream and river valleys will be based on an integrated approach in which water management, climate protection, carbon storage and biodiversity will be the focus. 166 Carbon fluxes are limited in the wetland land use category. This does not mean that this category is insignificant, but rather that it only comprises a small amount of land. Given the potentially large carbon stock present per hectare of wetland, conserving these areas is a key concern. Opportunities to capture more greenhouse gases in the most important Flemish ecosystems will be studied in more detail. As a result, the impact of land use and management on carbon storage must be quantified so that innovative methods of management can be developed. In the future forest and nature policy, the impact on Flemish carbon stocks will be systematically analysed and every effort will be made to limit the impact on the Flemish LULUCF balance. New market-based funding mechanisms will be developed and rolled out (see point 3.1.1.1.6.3) in order to increase carbon storage in the soil and aerial biomass.   Increased carbon storage in wood products and the circular economy The use made of timber harvested from (existing) forests determines how quickly the carbon is converted to CO2 after harvesting. The LULUCF Regulation lays down rules on calculating and reporting the carbon storage in harvested wood products (HWP). In climate terms and in line with the cascade principle, it is advisable to use wood products for products with a long life cycle and only afterwards (e.g. at the end of the life cycle) for energy generation. The above principles are applied in the work of the OVAM and the Environment Department on the circular economy. In the future, the impact of policy choices on carbon stocks in wood products and therefore on the greenhouse gas inventory will be quantified and every effort will be made to limit the impact on the Flemish LULUCF balance.   Establishment of a Flemish carbon market as part of the LULUCF policy  Complying with the no-debit rule requires investment in carbon storage through a variety of land uses. In addition to public investment, creating a Flemish carbon market may be an appropriate and useful funding instrument. Such a market would serve as a platform for bringing together operators developing projects to achieve negative emissions (carbon storage) (the supplier) and businesses, organisations and individuals wanting to reduce their climate impact (the purchaser). In practical terms, this could involve a business undertaking to offset the climate impact of aircraft movements, for example, by investing in the planting of a forest. At the moment, this is often achieved by supporting foreign projects with unknown results, due to a lack of national alternatives. o The CO2 market is a local market. Projects are carried out in Flanders and not abroad. They contribute not only to the Flemish LULUCF balance, but also to innovation in land use, and they encourage the local economy (see rural policy). There are other international offsetting mechanisms. Potential negative emission projects include protecting and expanding wetlands, creating forests, and promoting silicate-based soil alteration and carbon enrichment in the various types of land use in agriculture, horticulture and forestry (carbon farming, agroforestry, etc.). Keeping projects local ensures closer links between suppliers and purchasers and also increased engagement in the projects, which in turns leads to greater climate awareness. Market studies also show that purchasers are prepared to pay a higher price for certificates generated by local projects. It is important to the Flemish Government that there are more suppliers and projects in Flanders, that initiatives and measures are effective at capturing greenhouse gases, and that they avoid unwanted side effects (too much focus on CO2 fixing to the detriment of other services provided by ecosystems). To ensure this, we could have certification by type of sequestration, based on the quantity of carbon fixed by the technique, among other aspects, and meeting the criteria of additionality, permanence and prevention of side effects. o The CO2 market is an independent and voluntary market. Projects generate exchangeable CO2 certificates, and suppliers and purchasers come together on a voluntary basis. The government does not provide 167 any subsidies, but acts as a facilitator by ensuring that the market operates smoothly and by controlling quality. It is very important that sound rules and reliable methods are established for determining negative CO2 emissions as this allows attractive and high-quality CO2 certificates to be offered (reliable and additional storage of CO2). o The CO2 market operates alongside policy. Businesses, organisations and individuals purchase CO2 certificates to offset the climate transition in Flanders or their own (persistent) residual emissions. This approach always acts as a supplement to existing agreements and obligations (such as the EU ETS or other national and international obligations) to avoid double counting in the emissions inventory. o The CO2 market is not just about CO2, but also offers other benefits. Negative emission projects do not just increase CO2 storage, but can also offer other benefits in terms of water infiltration, combating erosion, biodiversity, etc. As CO2 certificates are a source of income, it will also be possible to initiate sustainable projects that are environmentally and nature friendly and that could be hard to pursue without this support. European regulations and conventions on local CO2 markets are still in the process of being drafted. In order to achieve their LULUCF objectives, some countries (such as the Netherlands and France) are taking exploratory steps in relation to local CO2 markets. This approach also offers huge potential in Flanders. Further research and development are needed in terms of the design and implementation of these systems, with the following aspects being important. - Potential: identify the negative emissions potential in Flanders, including opportunities for businesses and services connected with the Flemish Government and local authorities. - Practical aspects: how would a carbon market be rolled out in Flanders? Would the expected result be achieved in practice? What is the link between the carbon market and the international framework (including the LULUCF Regulation)? - Instruments: establish comprehensive rules and reliable methods for high-quality CO2 certificates. Research: to support this policy, we need to have scientific expertise on CO2 storage options and techniques (for example, carbon stored in the soil, biochar, accelerated alteration), both in land-based systems (agriculture, forests and nature reserves) and coastal-based systems (for example, construction of wind farms and coastal protection).  Walloon Region The actions planned in the agricultural and forestry sectors firstly involve continuing and strengthening current policies and measures. Additional measures will subsequently be considered, based on an assessment of current actions.  Existing policies and measures The policies and measures that are already in place are starting to have an impact. Most of the actions in the agricultural and forestry sectors involve strengthening these measures:   Maintain and increase existing carbon stocks in agriculture and forestry Agricultural and forestry soils contain large stocks of carbon, significantly more than in aerial biomass. Several practices, such as simplified cultivation techniques or no-till under certain conditions, can help to increase carbon stocks in these soils. Permanent grasslands also contain carbon stocks that must be preserved. Additionally, their destruction can release huge quantities of nitrogen (up to 700 kg in the year after destruction). As a result of the greening of the common agricultural policy, Europe requires permanent grasslands to be maintained and preserved. 168 Ploughing a permanent grassland has been totally banned since 1 January 2015 in 91 of the 240 Natura 2000 sites in Wallonia. At the other sites, ploughing a permanent grassland is subject to authorisation. It is vital that these requirements are maintained or even reinforced by extending them to all Natura 2000 sites. In terms of forest management, and more particularly planting, local subsidies are granted to private owners to ensure the renewal of softwood and hardwood stands (80). Lastly, over half of Walloon forests are PEFC certified (Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification Schemes), which is a global certification system that guarantees the sustainable management of forests. Currently, 300,000 hectares are certified in Wallonia (81) (271,340 hectares of Walloon public forest and 30,437 hectares of private forest), which represents 54% of all the forests in Wallonia. Almost all public forests are already certified.   Manage Walloon forests with a view to helping them adapt to climate change The themes of the Fourth Framework Agreement on Forest Research and Extension (82) include forest management and risk assessment in the context of global changes, prospective analysis tools for the Walloon forest based on data from the Permanent Inventory of Walloon Forest Resources, and the design of innovative silvicultural systems. Continued funding of this research is provided for by the Forestry Code. Various research projects and results are directly linked with maintaining and improving forest resources in the long term, in a context of climate change. The themes of this research reflect the principles and guidelines set out below. Species must be appropriate for forestry stations in order to improve not only productivity, but also the resilience of forests. In 2017, a new version of the Ecological Species List (83) was published; this tool helps managers of forest and natural spaces to make planting decisions. The biomass removal intensity must be compatible with maintaining soil fertility in the long term. This will be determined in particular by quantifying the mineral exports as a result of logging. The reaction of trees to repeated stresses (insect attacks, frost, drought, soil quality, etc.) is currently being studied in order to better manage forests, for example by reducing the density of trees to improve access to resources (water and nutrients), by planting them in adapted forestry stations or by mixing them with other species (diversity). Research is ongoing into species that should be better able to support a drier and hotter climate, particularly by examining the reactions of species planted in arboretums to various climate stresses (drought, frost, etc.). The aim is to identify species that are more resistant to drought and produce high-quality wood so that species diversity and good wood production can be maintained in the future. Modelling the growth of forests is also continuing, with the aim of identifying the most appropriate management methods to ensure that forests are more resilient to future environmental uncertainties. One type of forest management involves mixed stands, which are particularly intended to increase the resilience of beech and oak forests as a result of more diverse forests that are better adapted to climate change. Beetle epidemics (Ips typographus and Ips chalcographus) have been particularly extensive in recent years, as a result of the windthrow linked with Storms Eleanor and David in 2017 and the weather conditions in 2018 and 2019, which really helped the insects to thrive. In this context, the Walloon Forest Health Observatory (84) was set up in 2011 to centralise data and knowledge on forest health within the Walloon and Brussels Capital Regions. Its main tasks are to produce a periodic review of forest health, detect and identify pathogenic insects                                                            80 http://www.province.luxembourg.be/fr/prime-provinciale-aux-plantations-forestiere-sprivees.html?IDC=4844&IDD=93372#.XVvwZvkzbIU  81 https://www.pefc.be/fr/presse-et-actualites/actualites/1995-300-000-ha-de-forets-certifiees-pefc-en-wallonie  82 https://www.foretwallonne.be/images/stories/pdffolder/ForetNatureHS1-web.pdf  83 https://www.fichierecologique.be  84 http://environnement.wallonie.be/sante-foret/  169 and fungi, participate in the production of a map of biotic and abiotic risks based on the vulnerability of forest species and forestry stations to forest health risks, and lastly centralise sufficient knowledge to coordinate the fight in the event of a health crisis.  G. Waste management, fluorinated gases and circular economy Federal State  Updating and practical implementation of the federal roadmap for a circular economy (85).  F-gases: o continued coordination and development of measures with the regions on F-gases; o implementation of the Kigali Amendment; o work on product standards and their use.  The Federal Government will propose that the life cycle analysis, which maps total CO2 production throughout the life cycle, forms part of a standard sustainability test. In any event, such analyses should definitely be used for products promoting energy efficiency and for products or parts needed to generate renewable energy. This action should be a sub-action of the implementation of methods for calculating the environmental footprint of products, so as to avoid transfers of impacts.  The roadmap would also facilitate further integration of the circular economy policy, by highlighting its benefits in terms of GHG emissions.  Flemish Region Implementation of a long-term vision for waste treatment facilities In 2016, the Implementation Plan for household waste and similar industrial waste (HAGBA) was approved. This plan is based on achieving a balance between the supply of combustible waste and treatment capacity. A second goal is for 200 kt to 250 kt of waste to disappear from residual waste through recycling and prevention. The HAGBA aims to improve the energy efficiency of waste incineration by primarily focusing on heat and steam applications and less on green certificates (electricity generation). In terms of energy, it is after all better to recover heat than to convert steam into electricity, which results in greater energy losses. Energy is best used in a high-quality cogeneration system, followed by steam and heat applications, and finally electricity generation. For a number of years (2014-2016), the supply of combustible waste has remained more or less the same. In a business-as-usual (BAU) scenario, this trend will continue in the future. However, additional actions aimed at selectively collecting and recycling more waste should reduce the amount of combustible waste available. We will shortly develop a long-term vision for waste treatment, based on which the Flemish Government will negotiate with the sector on reducing capacity. If a balance is achieved between treatment capacity and supply of combustible waste and if the HAGBA ambitions are met, incineration capacity will have to be reduced. By 2030, this could involve a reduction of around 25%. If supply is effectively reduced, capacity will also have to be systematically reduced, starting with the least efficient or most polluting capacity (in a similar way to the landfill capacity having been reduced as the corresponding supply has decreased). In collaboration with the sector, the OVAM will study which instruments can be used to ensure that the least efficient capacity is effectively reduced. The incineration capacity maintained in the meantime must have the highest possible energy performance and the lowest possible emissions. Around 2030, there will be a pivotal moment in the current authorisation periods. During the period 2030-2033, the authorisations for 1,500,000 tonnes, i.e. around 65% of the existing incineration capacity, will expire. A                                                            85 http://www.marghem.be/wp-content/uploads/CIRC-ECON-NL-LIGHT-2.pdf  170 decision will therefore have to be made at that point as to whether to authorise or re-authorise a large number of facilities. The starting point for granting new authorisations at that time must be that only facilities needed to meet the capacity requirement and compatible with a CO2-neutral society in 2050 will be authorised. This will require an effective set of criteria for assessing whether or not a facility can continue to be operated. In addition, it will be examined how waste incineration facilities can capture the CO2 emitted in 2050 and use it as a raw material in a circular economy (CCS).  Undertaking to pre-ferment vegetable, fruit and garden waste  On 10 July 2015, the Flemish Government approved the ction Plan for the sustainable management of (residual) biomass streams 2015-2020. This action plan aims to further encourage prevention, selective collection and recycling of (residual) biomass streams with a view to saving on costs, raw materials, equipment and energy. The plan provides a framework for the government and relevant sectors to jointly implement the sustainable management of (residual) biomass streams in Flanders over the period 2015-2020. The action plan states that (residual) biomass streams can be used for energy applications. The preferred option is to combine this approach with the production of one or more high-quality products, as in the case of anaerobic digestion, which therefore meets the applicable sustainability criteria. The measure involving the pre-fermentation of vegetable, fruit and garden (VFG) waste was therefore included in the action plan. Pre-fermenting VFG waste before it is composted releases biogas that can be recovered to generate renewable energy. Some VFG waste composting facilities will therefore be (partly) converted for pre-fermentation with post-composting, where this is technically and economically viable.  Extension of the selective collection of plastics with the corresponding sorting and recycling capacity The selective collection and recycling of household and commercial plastics will be increased in order to reduce CO2 emissions from their primary production and incineration. This will be accompanied by increased cooperation with the Federal Government to make recyclable or reusable packaging more attractive through a policy based on products or financial incentives. The plan to allow all plastic packaging to be placed in recycling bags should significantly reduce the number of plastic items left in residual waste. For businesses also, we will work to strengthen instruments. By 2030, the plastics sorting and recycling capacity in Flanders should quadruple compared with 2015. Flanders has a vast knowledge base, is recognised as a leading player in sorting, and enjoys a major advantage due to the excellent location of its ports and the synergy between the Flemish chemical sector and the recycling sector. Flanders must focus on speeding up the development of more extensive and innovative plastics sorting and recycling capacity. The Flemish holding company for the environment lies at the root of this strategic infrastructure and is responsible, on behalf of the Flemish Region, for supporting and implementing environmental policy. When it is wound up, its activities will be taken over by Participatiemaatschappij Vlaanderen (PMV). Initial measures to develop additional sorting capacity have already been adopted under the P+MC plan.   Other strategic measures - Intensive research is being carried out in order to develop an appropriate combination of instruments that will allow the selective collection and recycling of similar industrial waste to be considerably increased. - Working with relevant partners, we are firmly committed to the mandatory selective collection of organic and biological waste from medium and large producers of this type of waste. - Using the Extended Producer Responsibility (ERP) instrument, we want to discourage the supply of products that are difficult to collect, sort and recycle, particularly through eco-modulation. 171 - Where there is potential to redevelop landfill sites, we are encouraging the reuse of raw materials from those sites. We are also encouraging landfill sites where non-recyclable waste is deposited to be designed and operated, as far as possible, on the basis of the waste streams potentially being used in the future, and therefore becoming recyclable. - Actions to remove asbestos from building envelopes (as included in the asbestos action plan) may encourage solar PV panels and insulation to be installed more quickly.  Walloon Region FLUORINATED GASES Voluntary sectoral agreements The measure involves concluding a voluntary agreement with the food distribution sector on reducing its GHG emissions. Both the use of fluorinated gases and energy consumption will be covered. It will be designed from the outset to reflect the increasing restrictions on the use of HFC gases enshrined in Regulation (EU) No 517/2014. An approach based on voluntary agreements means that businesses (or federations) can be subject to obligations that relate to results rather than the means used to achieve those results. The Walloon Government believes that it is more effective to set businesses (or federations) targets for reducing GHG emissions (albeit with a specific focus on HFCs), while leaving them free to decide on the most appropriate means of achieving those targets. This option appears to be preferable to making certain working methods or technologies mandatory. Voluntary HFC agreements can be used to outline trajectories for reducing HFC emissions (to be achieved by reducing leakage rates, among other aspects). The overall target of this voluntary agreement will be to reduce F-gas emissions by 90% by 2030, initially compared with 2005. The reference year for this calculation will be negotiable in order to avoid penalising businesses that have already recently invested in measures to reduce HFC emissions. At this stage, the target set in the voluntary agreement can be broken down into three secondary goals:  take action in relation to refrigerant gases in installations;  improve the energy efficiency of commercial food distribution premises;  develop renewable energy sources in order to achieve zero GHG emissions from any new commercial food distribution building from 2025.  Support for businesses wanting to replace equipment Businesses wanting to install refrigeration equipment that uses alternative refrigerants are already currently eligible for investment aid. However:  the distribution sector, which is the main emitter of HFCs, is excluded;  the method used to calculate aid is complex because the aim is to cover part of the additional investment cost compared with the reference technology (which must therefore be defined). The objective of the new measure will therefore be to:  encourage operators to switch to a non-HFC solution;  simplify the current aid mechanism and introduce specific aid for the distribution sector;  grant higher subsidies for replacing installations that contain large quantities of fluorinated greenhouse gases, expressed in t CO2eq;  ensure that the F-gas is properly recovered during the replacement operation.  172 Additional training on the use of alternative refrigerants/alternative technologies The purpose of this measure is to prepare courses on new refrigerants/technologies (with a particular focus on safety--the-first step, priority will be given to training courses relating to the use of CO2; subsequent training courses will cover the following topics:  propane and fluorinated greenhouse gases that have a low global warming potential but that are inflammable;  ammonia. Training centres will also need to be provided with access to appropriate technical infrastructure so that technicians can be trained in these new technologies.  CIRCULAR ECONOMY The Walloon Waste and Resources Plan (Plan Wallon des déchets-ressources  PWD-R), adopted in March 2018, contains more than 700 actions designed to reduce, reuse, sort, recycle and recover waste. Key actions will primarily aim to speed up the transition to a circular economy, with some having already been implemented (86). It is vital that tailored solutions are easy for everyone to access, that circular economy initiatives are encouraged and that different types of incentive are available for project owners. The aim is also to avoid lock-ins and develop public infrastructure, where necessary.  Development of circular and local supply The PWD-R sets out a series of measures designed to stimulate sustainable supply. and  The following measures aim to support businesses by informing them: - economically viable models, and make economic operators aware of opportunities, particularly by offering new manageme - raise awareness among industrial businesses about the eco-design of products to facilitate their dismantling  - es of information between producers and the recycling industry (identification of the materials in products, identification of products where advances must be made in terms of eco- The PWD-R also aims to develop synergies within the region (industrial and regional ecology): - -products of one sector into raw materials for another  - ingle  - carry out business promotion actions in the field to encourage businesses to form recovery and exchange partnerships in relation to by- - -stakeholder biomethanisation projects (farmers, local                                                             86 http://economiecirculaire.wallonie.be  173 In addition to practical support, the Walloon Region will approve financial instruments to support and encourage the various stakeholders towards more circularity:  The PWD-R also aims to encourage the functionality economy (e.g. facilitating and encouraging the rental of equipment, rather than its purchase) and increase the period of use of equipment (e.g. reinforcing and supporting the network of Repair Cafés, creating new waste sorting and recovery centres). Wallonia will also endeavour to develop short supply chains in the agri-food sector, by supporting the set-up of agri-food cooperatives so that they can reach a critical mass ensuring their commercial viability. d and promoted, involving private operators, local authorities, associations, universities, businesses, technical centres, research centres and the GreenWin innovation cluster, in order to create a platform for synergies between all stakeholders so that innovative collaborative projects can be developed. This multisectoral platform will identify and facilitate opportunities for collaboration in terms of available resources between businesses involved in the production, processing and distribution of products and businesses involved in the supply of services, mainly in the high added value sectors such as (de-)construction and electrical and electronic equipment.  Brussels Capital Region Fluorinated gases, used in refrigeration and air-conditioning systems, aerosols, fire-fighting and insulating foams, are a group of powerful greenhouse gases (87). For the Brussels Capital Region, the inventory of greenhouse gases shows that the proportion of fluorinated gases is 8% of regional GHG emissions (compared with 3% for the whole of Europe). This 8% breaks down as follows: 74% for refrigeration, air-conditioning and heating, 3% for foams, 6% for aerosols, 2% for fire-fighting and 15% in semiconductors and other uses. In 2017, gas losses from refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment (fugitive emissions) were equivalent to over 350,000 tonnes of CO2. Ambitious measures are therefore needed to combat these losses, with closer monitoring of equipment and bodies. Against this background, the Brussels Government undertakes to: - significantly increase checks of HFC refrigerant gases by refrigeration engineers from 2020; - in 2020, introduce a financial incentive for new refrigeration equipment (including precision air-conditioning units and air-conditioning systems) using alternative refrigerants (refrigerants not listed in Annex I to Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 on fluorinated greenhouse gases).  H. Other policies Federal State Governance  Energy and climate burden sharing agreement 2021-2030.  The competent federal authorities will have sufficient human and financial resources to plan, coordinate, implement and monitor the policy effectively and efficiently within tight deadlines.  Reform of the existing administrative framework to ensure the closest possible alignment with the Governance of the Energy Union and the international framework, and more particularly the Paris Rulebook, in order to improve energy and climate policy and monitoring, among other aspects, throughout the planning, implementation, evaluation and correction cycle. This will be achieved by:                                                            87 Fluorinated gases have a global warming potential (GWP) that is several hundred or even several thousand times higher than CO2. In working to protect the ozone layer, the Montreal Protocol has therefore had the perverse effect of leading to the development of new substances that exacerbate the greenhouse effect and global warming. 174 o developing a common medium- and long-term vision and trajectory resulting in a robust policy framework for all policy levels (national, regional, local, etc.) and offering clear prospects to all stakeholders, particularly young people; o introducing a federal policy cycle, coordinated with the national policy cycle, in which each revision of the integrated energy and climate plan will involve a multi-stakeholder dialogue and be subject in advance to the federal parliament.  International cooperation  The annual Belgian contribution to international climate financing reflects international climate ambitions that have steadily grown over the years. These various ambitions should be achievable by continuing and increasing the budgetary commitments for carrying out specific international projects aimed at increasing the adaptability of developing countries, whether through technological innovation, which will help to raise standards of living while reducing GHG emissions, or through energy efficiency, sustainable land, agriculture and forest management, water resources management, etc.  xi. Where relevant, regional cooperation in this area Not applicable.   xii. Without prejudice to the applicability of State aid rules, financing measures, including Union support and the use of Union funds, in this area at national level, where applicable Federal State  Green OLOs (Belgian linear bonds): in 2018 and 2019 the Federal Government launched the first green linear bonds (Green OLOs), totalling EUR 6.89 billion, with the income being used solely for public expenditure on the transition to a sustainable economy. The new eligible expenditure for the period 2021-2030 will be made in the transport, energy and buildings sectors, essentially based on this plan, the Energy Pact and the National Pact for Strategic Investments.  The National Bank of Belgium (BNB) will be asked to continue its efforts in the area of climate analysis, in particular by including this in its annual Financial Stability Report on the Belgian economy.  2021-2027 is compatible with and contributes to the achievement of the Paris Agreement objectives. i.e. to spend this part of the budget on climate actions, and will ensure that this climate mainstreaming is reflected in all areas of expenditure. In addition, the implementation, monitoring and reporting of the climate mainstreaming principle must be improved to ensure that the positive climate impact of expenditure is maximised.  A Belgian regulatory framework appointing the supervisory authorities and a legal framework defining sustainable finance for the purpose of meeting the requirements of the Taxonomy Regulation will be developed based on the existing European regulations.  A methodological framework for collaborative working and funding arrangements at Belgian level will be developed so that maximum use can be made of EU funding opportunities in the low-carbon transition/energy sector: CEF, Horizon Europe, InvestEU, BICC, ESIF, new EIB funding policy, etc. In response to the Commission recommendation on the quantification of investment needs, supplemented by a comprehensive assessment of all investments needed to achieve the objectives, reference can be made to the National Pact for Strategic Investments (see point 5.3). On 11 September 2018, under the National Pact for Strategic Investments, a report was submitted by a Strategic Committee (group of independent experts) 175 an assessment of the strategic investment needs in Belgium through to 2030, which cover six areas (88), including energy and mobility. Against this background, the working group on energy has produced a detailed technical report on the summarised in the following table. Area Recommendation Funding (billion EUR) Public Private Major renovation of public buildings  Invest heavily in the renovation of public buildings to make them intelligent and more energy efficient 8.5 8.5 Electricity mix  Continue to guarantee security of supply at competitive prices  Continue developing renewable energy, including for households  Find a solution to further reduce the cost of renewable energy 0 19 Strengthening of systems   Invest in transmission and distribution systems to ensure a fair and more flexible transition  Support the development of smart grids 0 17 Development of storage  Use the storage capacity (of vehicles, housing and businesses)  Attract a battery producer to Belgium  Develop pumped storage 0 5 Roll-out of alternative fuels  Ensure that there are sufficient CNG refuelling stations and electricity charging stations  Support R&D in hydrogen and green gas 0 0.3 Nuclear decommissioning and waste management research  Support projects aimed at building the decommissioning knowledge of Belgian businesses via the Advanced Belgian Cluster on Decommissioning (ABCD)  Research how to effectively treat nuclear waste 0.7 1 TOTAL~  ~9 ~51   ~60 Impact   Renovating the building stock will quickly lead to a considerable reduction in energy consumption by authorities, which will result in major savings and help Belgium to achieve its energy targets by 2030. It will also have a significant impact on SMEs and other stakeholders in the private sector.  The investments made in systems and generating capacity will help to guarantee security of supply.  Encouraging the use of CNG (and other greener fuels) will result in a healthier environment for the Belgian population.   The report produced by the working group on mobility offers the following assessment. Area Recommendation Funding (billion EUR) Public Private                                                            88  176 Maintain and develop integrated transport networks and services  Service and maintain existing infrastructure (e.g. bridges, tunnels)  Improve access to towns and cities, particularly through suburban rail systems, hubs and integrated cycle paths  Improve rail access to ports and industrial parks and modernise locks 17.2-20.5 2.8-3.5 Facilitate intelligent mobility solutions  Set up a national real-time data lake  Create a single group mobility application to -to-  Roll out intelligent transport systems (ITS) to reduce congestion 1.5-2 0.1 Manage transport demand  Promote spatial planning and redevelopment of industrial sites  Create satellite offices and coworking spaces  Smart charging for mobility services  Promotional events on the theme of mobility 0 2 Establish a support framework  Create a National Mobility Observatory  Produce a multiannual multimodal investment agenda (providing a clear vision of investments and specific governance structures at the appropriate level (metropolitan, regional or national)) 0 <0.1 TOTAL~  ~19 ~6   ~22.27 Impact   More intelligent mobility and reduced demand for mobility will reduce the economic losses caused by congestion.  Major infrastructure projects also create jobs, which has a significant multiplier effect on the economy.  Helping hand to high-technology digital operators in the smart mobility sector  ii. Sector or market risk factors or barriers in the national or regional context iii. Analysis of additional public finance support or resources to fill identified gaps identified under point (ii) Sources of funding for strategic investments have also been discussed in detail under the National Pact for Strategic Investments (PNIS). The issue of mobilising capital is one of the four cross-cutting factors identified in the Strategic Committees report (89), on which action must be taken to encourage investment. In relation to the  However, the work to identify national, regional and EU funding sources is still ongoing. In particular, technical work on the subject is being carried out within two projects (90) established by a decision of the Consultation Committee of 27 March 2019.                                                             89 The four cross-- 90 of 7 November 2018) and tasked with preparing for the Interministerial Conference on Strategic Investments. They are as oject  III: Mobilisation of capital  177 3.1.2. Renewable energy The common thread running through cost-effectiveness, taking into account the wealth of geographical, socioeconomic and technological potential. Although powers are shared between federal and regional authorities, interaction between these authorities is maintained.   xiii. Policies and measures to achieve the national contribution to the binding 2030 Union target for renewable energy and trajectories as referred to in point (a)(2) Article 4, and, where applicable or available, the elements referred to in point 2.1.2 of this Annex, including sector- and technology-specific measures Federal State  Develop offshore wind capacity in the North Sea. Policy note in the draft law of 20 July 2018 on the procedure for awarding new wind farms (law scheduled to be adopted by the end of the parliamentary term).  Achieve 4 GW by 2030 as indicated in the draft federal contribution.  Further exploit the MOG/North Seas Energy Cooperation (NSEC)/international waters potential in the context of the regional cooperation with other countries bordering the North Sea.  Engage with neighbouring countries in regional and bilateral cooperative relationships with a view to developing joint projects for the generation of offshore energy, particularly within the framework of NSEC. Open discussions are ongoing with the Ministry of Defence on the installation of onshore wind turbines around military zones with prohibited access and in areas around airports.  Continue the supply of green electricity and extend it to all managed buildings within the federal public building stock.  Maximise the generation and use of renewable energy (green power, installation of photovoltaic solar panels).  In the draft Marine Spatial Plan for the period 2020-2026, several areas have been designated for industrial and commercial activities. These areas may (directly or indirectly) contribute to the achievement of the national energy and climate targets.  Biofuels: In 2030, the biofuel incorporation rate will reach 10.45% (in real terms) or 13.9% (including double counting). During the period 2021-2030, the first-generation biofuel incorporation rate will be 7%. The proportion of the biofuels listed in Parts A and B of Annex IX will develop in line with the following scenario, in the context of RED II: Biofuels 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 Actual value 8.95 8.95 9.25 9.55 9.8 10 10.2 10.45 10.45 10.45 10.45 1G 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 Part A 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 0.5 1 1.5 1.75 1.75 Part B 1.85 1.85 2.15 2.45 2.7 2.5 2.7 2.45 1.95 1.7 1.7 Double counting 0.6 0.6 0.95 0.95 0.95 2.2 2.2 2.7 3.2 3.45 3.45 Nominal value 9.55 9.55 10.2 10.5 10.75 12.2 12.4 13.15 13.65 13.9 13.9  The Federal Government will adopt additional GHG reduction and renewable energy measures by 1 January 2025 at the latest in order to meet its incorporation rate commitments made in the draft NECP approved by the Consultation Committee on 19 December 2018, and to ensure that the adjusted incorporation obligation does 2 emission figures. 178 Every two years, a study will examine the following aspects: technical feasibility of the incorporation rate; availability of raw materials; environmental integrity and potential usage conflicts; availability of advanced fuels, including recycled carbon fuels, and technological developments on the European market; availability of other renewable energy sources; consumer costs. The first of these interfederal studies will be carried out in the second half of 2020, after consulting the relevant stakeholders, and will allow the incorporation rate to be adjusted, if necessary. If the target is not met, alternative federal measures will be implemented to achieve the same level of emissions reduction and to contribute to the renewable energy target. The Regions may themselves adopt additional alternative measures, if they so wish.  Flemish Region Policies and measures Measures have been developed in the various policy areas in order to achieve the renewable energy target. Energy area: Solar Plan of 24 June 2016 includes the following practical actions (which are now being implemented) aimed at developing the use of solar energy in Flanders. - Develop a solar map showing appropriate roof surfaces for potential investors (photovoltaic panels and solar water heaters). - Calculate the solar potential across Flanders and in towns based on a solar map. - Broadcast weather forecasts on regional television channels and a website which predict how much solar energy will be generated. - Remove the restriction preventing extensions to photovoltaic systems from being authorised within 36 months. - Increase the minimum contribution of renewable energy in new-builds from 10 kWh/m² to 15 kWh/m² from 2017. For non-residential buildings, this contribution will be 20 kWh/m². - Introduce a minimum contribution of renewable energy in buildings undergoing a major energy renovation of 10 kWh/m² from 2017 and 15 kWh/m² from 2018. For non-residential buildings, this contribution will be 20 kWh/m². - Adjust the representative categories for photovoltaic systems in the calculation of the uneconomic portion. - Involve various sectors in developing a sectoral declaration of commitment on the installation of photovoltaic systems. - Develop a policy framework for the crowdfunding of investments in renewable energy generation: production of a solar guide. - Simplify the opportunity for involvement in order to achieve the minimum contribution of renewable energy. - Expand low-cost energy loans. - Develop standard specifications to encourage public authorities to allow third parties to install photovoltaic systems on the roofs of their public buildings.  Wind Energy 2020 concept note of 16 December 2016 includes the following practical actions to help realise the wind potential. - Establish an interagency consultation on the provincial wind targets. - Support the provinces in researching and analysing wind potential. - Maximise the wind potential in Flemish port areas. 179 - Maximise the wind potential in large industrial areas. - Create a Defence thematic working group. - Create a Civil Aviation thematic working group. - Explore options for speeding up the time taken to process planning applications. - Reinforce and increase the uptake in wind energy: develop a wind energy guide. Voluntary declaration of commitment with measures to increase support. - Maximise wind energy in areas favourable to projects. - Calculate the long-term wind energy potential. - Facilitate the installation of wind turbines at radar/airport sites (EUR 3 million).  The Heat Plan approved by the Flemish Government on 2 June 2017 includes the following practical actions to encourage investment in the environmentally friendly production of heat and the construction of district heating systems (already implemented or in the process of being implemented). - Organise an annual call for green heat, waste heat and biomethane with an annual budget of EUR 10.5 million. - Set a target for the extension of district heating systems to 2030. - Identify areas of interest in district heating systems using a refined thermal map and other available energy data. - Produce a manual for connecting existing multi-family residential buildings to district heating systems. - Develop a heat assessment concept for infrastructure work. - Set up information and exchange channels between local authorities on the installation of district heating systems. - Introduce support for public engagement in district heating systems. - Research guarantees of origin for green gas and green heat. - Optimise the way in which district heating systems are taken into account in the energy performance regulations. - Allocate aid more effectively to micro-cogeneration: investment aid instead of operating aid. - Introduce sustainability criteria for biomass. - Transfer support from green electricity to the use of heat (cogeneration). - Increase the minimum contribution of renewable energy in the energy performance regulations. - Calculate the potential of large-scale solar water heaters. - Improve the potential of heat pumps. - Identify and remove obstacles to heat pumps. - Develop a system of guarantee for the geological risks of deep geothermal energy. - Ensure cooperation and support through the European Geothermal ERA-NET project. - Include deep geothermal energy in the EPB under the energy performance regulations. - Support organisations promoting sustainable energy: Biogas-E, ODE, Warmtenetwerk Vlaanderen, Cogen Vlaanderen. - Prepare an atlas of renewable energies in order to calculate and show the renewable energy potential of each municipality in Flanders on an interactive map of Flanders.  180 Tax area: - Increase the flexibility of the property tax exemption criteria for national properties where renewable energy technologies are installed. - Introduce property tax relief in the case of major energy renovations, where renewable energy impacts on the E-level achieved. - Extend the property tax exemption to equipment and appliances, which encourages businesses to invest in replacements (new machinery that is more energy-efficient and environmentally friendly than the old machinery). - Introduce a specific reduced rate of gift tax on property where the recipient carries out energy saving work, including the use of renewable energy technologies. - Clarify how the win-win loan applies to energy cooperatives.  Mobility and Public Work area: - Install hydroelectric plants at locks. - Install solar panels and/or wind turbines on decentralised facilities. - Transition public vehicle fleets and vessels to environmentally friendly energy sources.  - Purchase electricity generated using renewable energy sources. - Install solar panels on public buildings and bus depots. - Gradually replace buses with electric models.  Work and Sport areas: - Install solar panels and solar water heaters on public buildings.  Walloon Region WR: Promotion of renewable electricity WR: Support mechanism: green certificates mechanism The main tool for supporting mechanism, under which funding is granted for the manufacture of systems. Following an internal evaluation, the Walloon Government believes that adapting the current mechanism is the most appropriate, pragmatic and cost-effective solution for continuing the growth in renewables in order to achieve the targets set. However, a number of key improvements must be made. - Gradual reduction in the support mechanism The support mechanism will remain in place until the technologies targeted by Wallonia are able to compete on an equal footing on the electricity market with conventional systems (powered by fossil and nuclear fuels). The revised version of the mechanism will reduce the support for new projects, by gradually limiting the envelopes for additional green certificates. - Limited impact on consumer bills Funding benchmarks have been set for each consumer category. The impact of the support mechanism is being monitored from a consumer protection perspective, and arrangements are in place to adjust it if necessary (changes in the funding split between consumer categories or the distribution of funding over time). When setting these benchmarks, consideration was given to the need for businesses to remain competitive and for individuals to share in the investment burden connected with the energy transition. 181 - Shift to calls for projects ering procedure for projects and sectors, making it possible to meet efficiency and market integration objectives while complying with the EU's move towards greater market integration. The use of calls for projects will allow tighter control over the pace of development, as well as facilitating competition between projects and targeting certain development areas. The following key principles will be applied:  minimum power thresholds for certain technologies;  predefined ceiling (in the absence of competition);  multi-criteria approach (environmental and social). Calls for projects will initially involve high-power systems only. Technologies will be required to compete with each other only at a later stage, when they have essentially proven their competitiveness. The calls for projects mechanism may eventually be extended to the production and distribution of renewable heat. -   Targeted support will be provided for the generation of electricity through the recovery of waste heat (following the model of high-efficiency cogeneration systems using fossil fuels). Over time, support will only be available under the mechanism for the generation of renewable electricity with a view to implementing the true cost burden on the electricity consumer:  support for the production of cogenerated heat will be provided through a different mechanism specifically targeted at renewable heat;  the mechanism for supporting the generation of electricity using biomethanisation methods will be assessed in order to identify potential improvements (with a view to ensuring that funding is only granted for the generation of renewable energy). - Changes in the level of support Changes will be made to the level of support according to market-based parameters (in particular the price of electricity, green certificates and guarantee of origin labels), with a view to allowing a high level of responsiveness, especially if the price of electricity rises.  WR: Other support measures for the generation of renewable electricity - Improvement and safeguarding of the general framework See point 3.1.2(v). - Adoption of a policy on photovoltaics Photovoltaics is a technology of the future that requires a high level of integration (of materials and infrastructures) together with a significant drop in production costs to make it a suitable solution for both the residential sector and the industrial sector.  By organising pilot projects involving buildings (for example in the public sector), Wallonia will aim to roll out BIPV (Building Integrated Photovoltaics) within the region. - Other support measures Other measures, coordinated with the 'green , will also promote the roll-out of renewable electricity in Wallonia: - investment aid, including investment aid granted to businesses in the interests of protecting the environment and promoting the sustainable use of energy; 182 - support aimed at helping industries to carry out feasibility studies before building renewable generation facilities (industry agreements); - support for research and pilot projects; - advisory service involving renewable and cogeneration experts (operational since January 2019); - energy information points.  WR: Development of a framework supporting renewable energy communities The Walloon Region led the way by starting discussions in September 2018 on the framework for new forms of energy sharing. The reform work resulted in the adoption on 30 April 2019 of a legislative framework designed to support the emergence of renewable energy communities (REC). Article 22 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources was also transposed early. This wide-ranging reform was based on the objectives of developing and integrating renewable energies, changing and adapting methods of energy production and consumption, and ensuring the energy transition and the energy competitiveness of businesses. Collective consumption of locally produced green energy will in particular help to limit the injection of electricity into the local transmission and distribution system by encouraging short supply chains. It will also help to grid, given that careful and local collective self-consumption can be accompanied by storage methods suited to individual and collective needs. The general principles set out in the Decree are as follows: - several participants can form a group in order to share and synchronise their production and consumption of renewable energy within a local area via the public grid; - the aim of the REC must be to generate, consume, store and sell renewable electricity in order to secure environmental, social and economic benefits for both its members and the local community; - the REC must be authorised by the Walloon Energy Commission (Commission Wallonne pour l'Energie  CWaPE) on the advice of the DSO, and must comply with certain conditions and obligations, particularly in terms of the collective self-consumption threshold. Where the REC meets its specific conditions, a special tariff for using the grid will be applied, as determined by the CWaPE. This tariff must strike a balance between solidarity in covering both the network costs and the contribution to taxes, surcharges and other regulated costs, and the interest in participating in such an operation. The WR therefore underlines the importance of the principles of solidarity and sharing of network costs. There are various possible combinations and scenarios. Several Walloon universities are also actively working on a number of experimental pilot projects.  WR: Individual and collective self-consumption of renewable electricity There is no obstacle in the Walloon regulations to the individual self-consumption of renewable energy, given that this is already authorised. A new regulatory framework will allow collective renewable energy self-consumption projects to be implemented and developed within a single building in accordance with Article 21 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001.  WR: Regulatory measures - Removal of the legal uncertainty associated with granting permits in the wind sector See point 3.1.2(v).  183 WR: Promotion of renewable heat Several measures are needed to provide a framework for the roll-out of renewable heat and cooling.  Implementation of a renewable heat transition plan, including a list of technological alternatives for multiple applications, in particular with a view to replacing the use of oil products for heating with less-polluting alternatives (heat pumps, solar thermal, district heating systems, geothermal energy, pellets/chips, biogas, biofuel, mini gas networks, etc.). This plan will be developed together with the updated report referred to in Article 14 of the Energy Efficiency Directive.  Wallonia will support the development of various forms of renewable heat, based on their respective advantages, through one or more appropriate mechanisms. In the residential sector, see the building-related measures.  Removal of all funding for boilers powered by fossil fuels where there are alternatives.   Measures for small-scale installations As far as individuals are concerned, it is a good idea to maintain a system of incentives specifically targeted at residential consumers in order to encourage them to fit heat pumps, boilers that use less-polluting resources than fossil fuels, or solar thermal panels, possibly combined with heat storage systems. The incentive will be calculated based on the increased cost of production compared with the baseline situation. As regards the worst performing buildings, priority will be given to energy efficiency work, which is also the target of the current incentive mechanism. measures will be introduced to encourage the replacement of poor-performing individual biomass heating systems or wood-burning stoves with wood pellet stoves or stoves that drastically reduce the emission of particulate matter. One measure could be, for example, to have a system of incentives for the replacement of stoves and pipework by qualified professionals. Particular emphasis must be placed on incentives for vulnerable individuals. An extra incentive will be granted for the most efficient appliances. In the public tertiary sector, the installation of renewable systems in public buildings will be promoted with a view to their exemplary role.  WR: Regulatory measures The cmust: - remove the obstacles to the development of district heating systems; - increase the profitability of injecting biogas into the networks. -term objectives so that real impetus is given to the growth in thermal energy in Wallonia.  WR: Cross-cutting measures - Implementation of a renewable obligation in new buildings An obligation to have a minimum percentage of renewable energy (91) in new buildings and major renovations will also be established. As a reminder, the European regulations (Article 15(4) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001) stipulate that Member States shall, in their building regulations and codes or by other means with equivalent effect, require                                                            91 This obligation also complies with Article Member States shall, in their building regulations and codes or by other means with equivalent effect, require the use of minimum levels of energy from renewable sources in new buildings and in existing buildings that are subject to major renovation in so far as technically, functionally and economi 184 the use of minimum levels of energy from renewable sources in new buildings and in existing buildings that are subject to major renovation in so far as technically, functionally and economically feasible, and reflecting the results of the cost-optimal calculation carried out pursuant to Article 5(2) of Directive 2010/31/EU, and in so far as this does not negatively affect indoor air quality. Member States shall permit those minimum levels to be fulfilled, inter alia, through efficient district heating and cooling using a significant share of renewable energy and waste heat and cold. In the work to develop the EPB regulations (EPB Decree), these obligations will take particular account of the most vulnerable in society. - Implementation of an integrated quality approach In transposing Directive 2009/28/EC, the Walloon Region implemented a certification system for installers of renewable energy systems. In order to be certified, installers must complete a training course that includes both theoretical and practical components. Given the importance of this system, the Walloon Region decided to take the quality process further by developing a quality label for businesses. This process has several objectives:  build momentum in terms of the quality approach;  raise awareness among the general public of the importance of investing in high-quality products;  propose a mechanism for offering quality guarantees to citizens investing in renewable energies;  support businesses that apply quality assurance procedures by giving them a platform. This approach must be continued, with a link being established between the granting of incentives and certification/labelling. - Framework for biomass use See point 3.1.2(vii). - Biomethanisation See point 3.1.2(vii). - Use of biogas See point 3.1.2(vii). - Cogeneration See point 3.1.2(vii). - Heating In terms   increase in performance so that better use can be made of wood for space heating (increase in performance from 10% to 20 %);  changes in technology where installations are placed by qualified professionals;  development of the sustainable use of biomass energy for municipal buildings and collective heating systems. Pellet production facilities are currently operating under capacity, as the sector could supply additional primary energy amounting to several GWh if operated at maximum capacity. However, an increase in production of this magnitude could result in supply problems for the local pulping industry. In terms of air quality, various options need to be analysed: use of filters, high-quality fuels and modern equipment, and regular maintenance. - Use of biomass See point 3.1.2(vii). 185 - Communication, information, awareness-raising Communication on specific topics, in particular the proper use of biomass appliances, will also be required. This measure ties in with the behavioural measure described in the previous chapter. The Walloon Region may also support initiatives aimed at setting up collective purchasing groups in order to make these installations more affordable and ensure quality monitoring, where is appropriate to the technology. It may also encourage individuals to participate in local energy production projects (e.g. green gas).  xiv. Where relevant, specific measures for regional cooperation, as well as, as an option, the estimated excess production of energy from renewable sources which could be transferred to other Member States in order to achieve the national contribution and trajectories referred to in point 2.1.2  xv. Specific measures on financial support, where applicable, including Union support and the use of Union funds, for the promotion of the production and use of energy from renewable sources in electricity, heating and cooling, and transport Flemish Region Financial instruments Energy area: - Support mechanism for the production of renewable energy: operating support through green certificates (around EUR 1.1 billion on an annual basis). - Low-interest or interest-free loans for a specific target group needing financial support (EUR 55 million per year) and encouragement for banks to grant energy loans. - Annual call for green heat, district heating systems, waste heat and biomethane (EUR 10.5 million per year). - System operator incentives for solar water heaters (around EUR 4 million per year). - System operator incentives for heat pumps and water heaters with heat pumps (around EUR 3 million and EUR 1.8 million per year respectively). - Encouragement of small- and medium-sized wind turbines through investment aid (EUR 4.2 million per year). - Easier installation of wind turbines at radar/airport sites (EUR 3 million).  General government policy area: - Co-financing of provincial support centres for sustainable construction, which raise awareness among builders and encourage them to build and renovate homes and districts sustainably. Using renewable energy sources forms part of this approach. Since 2010, the sustainable development policy has supported five provincial support centres through five-year agreements (one per province). In 2016, following an evaluation, the agreements were renewed for a further five years.  Education area: - Loans for installing solar panels on school buildings (EUR 5 million per year).  Social economy area: - Loans for investing in renewable energy for social economy initiatives (EUR 5 million per year). 186 - Launch of a call for sheltered and social workshops in investment projects encouraging an efficient working environment and sustainable mobility (EUR 8.1 million per year).  Social housing area: - Within the maximum subsidy amount, fixed sum for solar water heaters for new-builds and renovations in the current design guidelines for social housing. - Within the maximum subsidy amount, fixed sum for renewable energy applications for new-builds and renovations in the future design guidelines for social housing from 1 January 2018. - Incentives under the Flemish Climate Fund: renewable energy applications: solar water heaters and heat pumps (EUR 20 million per year).  Administrative issues area: - Application of renewable energy technologies in Flemish government buildings (EUR 8.3 million in 2018).  Economy, science and innovation area: - Investment aid (known as ecology aid) granted to businesses (around EUR 3.4 million per year). - Flux50 cutting-edge research centre investigating energy technologies (EUR 500,000 per year).  Culture, media and youth area: - Budget to make cultural buildings more energy efficient and use renewable energy sources (EUR 5 million per year). - Loans for installing solar panels (EUR 5 million per year).  Agriculture and fisheries area: - VLIF (Flemish Agricultural Investment Fund) aid scheme for investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy sources in agriculture. - Support for farmers with their investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy sources.  xvi. Where applicable, the assessment of the support for electricity from renewable sources that Member States are to carry out pursuant to Article 6(4) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001  xvii. Specific measures to introduce one or more contact points, streamline administrative procedures, provide information and training, and facilitate the uptake of power purchase agreements | Summary of the policies and measures under the enabling framework Member States have to put in place pursuant to Article 21(6) and Article 22(5) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 to promote and facilitate the development of self-consumption and renewable energy communities Flemish Region Streamlining of administrative procedures Environment area: - Introduction of a single environmental permit rather than separate environmental permit and planning permission. 187 - Launch of project studies to facilitate the roll-out of renewable energy installations, for example the Energielandschappen project, SIG studies into wind modelling and scenario analyses for the installation of wind turbines, the Atelier Diepe Geothermie, and the role of spatial planning in the energy and climate transition. - Development of a regulatory framework for exploring and exploiting deep geothermal energy. - Drafting of a circular on the installation of wind turbines, solar panels and other renewable energy installations.  Walloon Region - Improvement and safeguarding of the general framework In order to make renewable technologies more competitive, the risks associated with their roll-out must be mitigated and their costs reduced (administrative procedures, harmonised permit procedures, guarantee scheme, etc.). In particular, and in accordance with the requirements in Article 16 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, the Walloon Region will take steps to facilitate the administrative permit granting procedure. - Removal of the legal uncertainty associated with granting permits in the wind sector In order to remove the obstacles to the development of wind power in Wallonia, the Walloon Government has identified 15 measures to help the wind sector grow. For the purpose of implementing these measures, several stakeholder undertakings will also be included in the Ecological Transition Convention, which is provided for under the Programme Decree that came into force on 18 October 2018. The Ecological Transition Convention resembles a Green Deal and should enable various stakeholders (private sector, public sector, associations, general public, etc.) to engage in a dynamic and collaborative process aimed at encouraging the energy transition through wind development projects. The Pax Eolienica: - aims to streamline administrative procedures for wind farm developers and improve existing tools in order to overcome tof current projects; - fully involve all stakeholders in tackling the challenges associated with the growth of renewables through the construction of wind farms in the Walloon Region; - seals the undertakings made by the parties involved.  The measures under the Pax Eolienica involve industry conditions, acoustic monitoring, the necessary legislative amendments to the Spatial Planning Code, in particular as regards permits, adjustments to the Electricity Decree allowing the roll-out of micro-networks, administrative streamlining, aviation-related criteria, access to land registry data, social acceptance and taxation. In return, the Walloon Government has set up a Biodiversity Fund, which will be topped up by wind farm developers required to pay environmental compensation, with grants under this fund being allocated to biodiversity restoration projects.  xviii. Assessment of the necessity to build new infrastructure for district heating and cooling produced from renewable sources Flemish Region In the past, district heating has not been commonly used in Flanders. However, since financial support was introduced in 2013, involving regular calls for tenders for green heat, waste heat, district heating systems and geothermal energy, a large number of new projects have been implemented and are still planned. 188 By the end of 2017, around 600 GWh of heat had been supplied through district heating systems. Based on the projects planned and approved, this figure is expected to increase to 1,500 GWh by 2020. The Energy Plan 2021-2030 is aiming for average growth of 250 GWh/year (4,000 GWh in 2030). Renewable energy accounted for 39% of the heat supplied to these systems in 2017, with this figure expected to rise to 52% by 2020.  xix. Where applicable, specific measures on the promotion of the use of energy from biomass, especially for new biomass mobilisation taking into account: biomass availability, including sustainable biomass: both domestic potential and imports from third countries; other biomass uses by other sectors (agriculture and forest-based sectors); as well as measures for the sustainability of biomass production and use Flemish Region As regards measures for biomass management in the Flemish Region, we would refer you to the Action Plan for the sustainable management of (residual) biomass flows prepared by the OVAM. This also contains a framework and measures for the sustainable use of forest biomass.  Walloon Region - Framework for biomass use In April 2016, a working group (Cross-Disciplinary Committee on Biomass) made up of representatives of different authorities submitted a report to the Walloon Government with recommendations on a Walloon Biomass Energy Strategy (produced after consulting various stakeholders). be necessary for each sub-sector to play a role in order to achieve the targets, taking into account the main methods for recovering energy from biomass and their various categories. The energy recovery procedures that offer the best environmental and energy performance will be prioritised and encouraged. Use of biomass for energy recto tackle the following main challenges: sustainability, conflict of uses, integration in the bioeconomy roadmap, and balance between energy carriers. The Walloon Government therefore wants to approve a framework regulating the use of biomass (all sources combined) for energy purposes. Efforts to network stakeholders as closely as possible will also continue. Before applications are made to reserve green certificates, the Cross-Disciplinary Committee on Biomass must give an opinion on renewable electricity generation projects involving biomass or biogasis to advise on the sustainability and hierarchy of uses of biomass inputs in such projects. Whenever the supply p - Biomethanisation In order to ensure sustainability, preference will be given to biomethanisation using by-products from crops grown for non-energy purposes or resulting from the treatment of waste (agricultural, household or industrial). The sources study indicates that adthe targets that have been set. In cases where biomethanisation plants require intercrops or even energy crops to stabilise production, best practices must be applied in the cultivation of these crops. A framework for agricultural biomethanisation will be adopted, particularly concerning waste management, management of digestates, energy crops (both main crops and intercrops), regulatory obstacles, etc. 189 The gas from renewable enerspeeding up the development of the biomethanisation sector. Under this reform, producers of RES gas that is injected into the natural gas transmission or distribution system in the Walloon Region receive guarantee of origin labels at the rate of one label per MWh injected, expressed as gross calorific value. These labels guarantee the renewable origin of the gas produced. They can then be sold to green electricity producers who use natural gas to fuel their fossil fuel-powered cogeneration plant, so that they can obtain additional green certificates, which must be reserved. The electricity generating plant must therefore be entitled to apply for green certificates, and the label supply contract between the RES gas producer and the green electricity producer must have a minimum term of two years. These measures also contribute to the efforts being made in the agricultural sector (see point 3.1.1(i) Agricultural and forestry sector). - Use of biogas Discussions will be started with the other levels of power with a view to promoting biogas as a biofuel. In the long term, the amount of biogas used in transport must be increased by adopting standards similar to those for liquid biofuels. In order to use biogas for heat production purposes:  the injection of biomethane into the natural gas network will be supported through the heat support mechanism and a framework ensuring that injection is technically feasible;  the on-site recovery of unrefined biogas will be supported through the heat support mechanism;  the use of biogas by green electricity producers will be encouraged through guarantee of original labels that can be traded for additional green certificates. - Cogeneration The expected progress in the area of cogeneration depends on the following factors:  improvements in energy performance;  recovery of energy from by-products;  increase in the internal use of generated energy;  development of cogeneration plants and improvements in existing plants as a local resource. At the moment, numerous cogeneration plant projects involving the gasification of wood come under the following heading . Production or processing of gas, excluding refinery gas, where the production capacity exceeds 100 Nm³/h (Class placed in Class 1 (production of gas), which is a major obstacle to the development of this type of cogeneration for those plants in which the gas is consumed on site to produce electricity and heat. This classification is inappropriate given the true impact of wood gasification technology on the environment. Cogeneration actually reduces the quantity of CO2 emitted, compared with separate heat and electricity production systems. The environmental permit headings must therefore be reviewed so that it is easier to develop this type of plant. - Use of biomass The use of raw materials that have been produced locally or by the consumer is a key stabilising factor in given that:  it automatically improves security of supply;  it avoids competition for resources;  it ensures a certain degree of price control;  it improves traceability;  it limits transport and therefore reduces the overall impact. 190 There is no need to make the priorities for using biomass mandatory and binding within Wallonia as the production of food (for humans and animals), the production of fibres (textiles), green chemistry and biomaterials, to name but a few, are all essential. These uses (and their respective proportions) will also change over time. It is necessary, however, to recognise and identify undesirable uses to ensure that they are not supported and to promote efficient use of the resource. Within this framework, the tools proposed by the Wood-Energy working group should guarantee the sustainable use of all biomass:  non-binding application of the cascade principle to the use of wood;    a financial benchmark for support mechanisms;  the adoption of supply plans and careful monitoring of their relevance and potential impacts at the level of the supply area;  improvements to sustainability monitoring procedures, including the certification of sustainable biomass by third parties in order to facilitate administrative monitoring and commercial trade. For industrial enterprises, international certification would have the benefit of being recognised in several different countries, which is not currently the case.  Brussels Capital Region Measures The proposed measures cover the electricity and heat/cooling sectors (92). In the latter case, in addition to the energy incentives that currently support certain renewable energies, a range of regulatory, stimulus or cooperation (with the Federal Government) measures should enable the Brussels Capital Region to annually increase the proportion of renewable energies in heat and cooling by more than 1.3 percentage points from the level to be achieved in 2020. Extra muros investment initiatives have also been launched. The region has already started the transition to more renewables, and the general public as well as businesses have invested in this area. The region will continue its efforts by setting an example in its public buildings, by requiring the same effort from other public authorities located in the territory, and by developing the most appropriate solutions for its urban environment. The solar sectors (thermal and photovoltaic) and heat pumps offer interesting prospects for decarbonising the regional energy system. NB: Some of the measures referred to below have also been included in the strategy to reduce the environmental impact of existing buildings in Brussels. They also feature here given the relevance of their direct impact on the decarbonisation of the buildings sector, whether they concern existing or new buildings.  Exemplary role of public authorities In order to continue the deployment of renewable energies in the regional territory, public institutions have to set an example and play a driving role in the energy and climate transition. In the Brussels Capital Region, public authorities have launched several ambitious initiatives in recent years. These include, for example, the SolarClick programme to install photovoltaic solar panels on the roofs of municipal and regional buildings, which alone will enable nearly 200 projects to be implemented by 2020 with an installed capacity of 12.5 MWc (93).                                                            92 Renewable energy in the transport sector (included in the NECP template) is the responsibility of the Federal State. 93 This programme is funded by the Region and will equip buildings that have well-insulated, favourable and suitably oriented roofs with photovoltaic solar panels. In total, 85,000 m² of panels will be installed in three years, resulting in an estimated renewable electricity surplus of 11 GWh/year and a CO2 saving of 4,500 tonnes/year from 2020. 191 The development of synergies between certain existing programmes will also be made possible from 2020, such as the interactions between SolarClick and NRClick. NRClick is a programme that helps municipalities to make energy savings in their buildings (94). For example, improved insulation makes the installation of heat pumps possible. With a better insulated roof, the building in question can be selected for the installation of photovoltaic solar panels (SolarClick). The panels can also help to power the heat pump. Certain buildings of the regional public authorities may also qualify: the buildings included in the economic expansion of Citydev will, for example, be particularly targeted for the installation of photovoltaic solar panels and for energy-sharing; the tertiary buildings in the economic expansion will be gradually equipped (25% of the buildings in 2020, 50% in 2025 and 100% in 2030); an incentive mechanism will be set up in 2020 for private buildings, and an obligation to include photovoltaic installations will be imposed at the same time for new buildings within the economic expansion sites. Finally, the separate collection of biowaste by 2024 has been approved by the Brussels Government (see above). To achieve its climate targets, the public policy of waste collection and treatment organised by Bruxelles-Propreté will be aligned with the r form part of the ecological transition pursued by the government.  All or some of the biowaste and green waste collected will be appropriately treated within the region, in particular by constructing a biomethanisation unit with renewable energy recovery within the territory. This treatment will, as appropriate, partly offset the gradual reduction in the production of renewable energy from the recovery of this biowaste in the Neder-Over-Heembeek incinerator (which is planned to be decommissioned by 2050 at the latest  see above). Against this background, the government undertakes to: - assess and redirect the NRClick and SolarClick programmes from 2021 towards specific support for the renovation of municipal and regional public buildings; - gradually develop photovoltaic installations on buildings within the economic expansion sites of Citydev.bussels; - continue and strengthen the collaboration with social housing associations, with the aim of investing in renewables in their buildings through the installation of photovoltaic solar panels funded by the Climate Fund and the revision of the management contract of the associations concerned (in line with the measures included in the strategy to reduce the environmental impact of existing buildings in Brussels that concern social housing); - recover all or some of the locally collected biowaste and green waste in a biomethanisation unit, which will only treat waste from Brussels and which will produce between 15 GWh/year, if the biogas is used in a cogeneration plant, and 19 GWh/year, if the biomethane is injected into the gas distribution system; - in order for 43% of the efforts planned by 2030 to have already been made by 2025, rapidly develop a strategy for investing in low-cost renewable electricity outside the regional territory with a view to contributing to the efforts planned in the Energy Pact and ensuring consistency with the electrification of uses in the region; by 2030, this strategy should enable the region to achieve an increase in electricity of 700 GWh ; - study the possibility of extending district heating systems powered by renewable energy; - by the end of the parliamentary term, ensure that the electricity supplied to all public buildings and facilities and to those facilities within public spaces (operators of billboards, scooters or electric bikes, etc.) is 100% renewable. - assess the green certificates system and adjust the rate at which certificates are granted, particularly taking into account the reduced cost of renewable energy systems.                                                            94 NRClick has the following objectives: a 15% reduction in the gas consumption of public buildings and a 5% reduction in the electricity consumption of public buildings. 192  Regulatory measures Working in partnership with regional public authorities, municipalities or operators of large plants is possible as shown in the previous section. However, where there are many different economic operators, the most effective actions are usually regulatory in nature. Just as it is nowadays unconceivable to design a building without insulation, it would seem absurd for new buildings not to be designed from the outset to incorporate renewable energies in those cases where energy is relevant. This approach has already been adopted in the Brussels regulations on the energy performance of buildings (EPB 2015 Strategy), as the relatively ambitious rules require (95) equipment that can generate renewable energy. Furthermore, in order to contribute to the electrification of transport with the aim of reducing energy consumption, improving air quality and reducing noise, solar panels must be installed in large car parks to take advantage of all the opportunities that exist locally. Against this background, the government undertakes to: - study the possibility of an obligation to install photovoltaic solar panels in large covered or open-air car parks managed by private owners, following an assessment of the best possible use of such spaces; - for any new district project or large building projects, consider carrying out a technical and economic feasibility study into the installation of a district heating system. In addition, in regulatory terms, the risks associated with rolling out renewable energy sources that are ill-suited to the urban context must be taken into account. This is the case with wood, which emits, when burnt, among other substances, fine particulate matter and more specifically very fine PM2.5 that penetrates deep into the respiratory tract. In 2015, wood did not even account for 1% of the regional energy supply; however, 30% of the fine particulate matter emitted in the region comes from the residential sector and 38% of those particulate matter emissions are caused by the burning of wood in domestic heating systems (96). This is substantial given the energy input actually provided. It should also be noted that, even when equipped with a particulate filter, the best systems burning wood or one of its derivatives still emit five times more fine particulate matter than natural gas systems. For information purposes, it is useful to note that the Bouwmeester (Chief Architect) of the Flemish Region recommends an outright ban on the burning of wood (97). Finally, the European Commission in  (98) matter in the residential sector (99). Given the public health issues associated with preserving regional air quality and the European obligations, the government undertakes to: - communicate in a meaningful and regular manner on this public health issue and further raise the populationthe pollution associated with the burning of wood in all its forms, even outside peak pollution periods; - study the possibility of enshrining in regional legislation a ban on the installation of central heating systems running on wood or its derivatives, bearing in mind the renewable heat potential in the region.                                                             95 Data from EPB certificates indicate that, since 2015, a renewable energy generating unit has been installed in 90.9% of new residential dwellings (68.8% photovoltaic solar panels, 16.7% cogeneration, 3.8% solar thermal and 1.6% heat pump). 96 Based on the new emission factors for wood, which were recalculated in 2018 and are lower than the values used previously. 97 https://www.vrt.be/vrtnws/nl/2018/02/21/vlaamse-bouwmeester---met-kerstmis-mag-je-houtkachels-nog-eens-a/ 98 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/air/pdf/clean_air_outlook_overview_report.pdf 99 https://www.rtbf.be/info/belgique/detail_la-belgique-la-moins-ambitieuse-d-europe-dans-la-lutte-contre-les-particules-fines?id=9943863 193 Stimuli While also adapting the existing support tools (energy incentives, green certificates), the government plans to promote and develop collective energy production using renewable sources. However, pilot projects will initially be needed to assess whether, and how, current electricity market rules need to be adapted for such projects. In this respect, the government will take the following steps. - Study the possible amendment of regional rules on the operation of the electricity market to encourage the emergence of collective projects and better use of renewable electricity generated locally within districts, while using and fairly remunerating the distribution system. To that end, the government will, as a priority, allow the implementation of pilot projects from no later than 2020 with the aim of identifying the most favourable conditions and the simplest methods for developing collective self-consumption. Based on the lessons learnt from the pilot projects, the government will support energy community development projects (voluntary grouping of inhabitants situated downstream from a district terminal for the purpose of collectively managing energy consumption and production). Cooperatives (existing and new) will also be helped to roll out energy production systems, with one category of shares being accessible by anyone wanting to take part in a collective project. - Extend the energy incentives to the most efficient air-to-air heat pumps.  - Refine support for BIPV (Building Integrated Photovoltaics (100)) through the green certificates mechanism. - Adapt the green certificates mechanism to support the installation of photovoltaic solar panels in public spaces (such as on bus shelters or fixed urban furniture). - Commission an assessment of the green certificates mechanism from the Brussels energy regulator, BRUGEL, which will also contain recommendations on options for simplifying the operation of the system that comply with European requirements, while maintaining an appropriate level of support in the Brussels context. The results of this study are to be presented to the government in 2020 so that it can adopt long-term reforms of the support system (ideally up to 2040) by no later than 2023.  Support The region already provides substantial support to the initiators of building or renovation projects, whether professionals or households. However, there is a lack of knowledge or even distrust with regard to heat pump systems, despite their undeniable benefits in terms of energy efficiency and use of renewable energy. In this context, the government undertakes to: - increase the support for professionals and individuals in relation to heat pumps in order to facilitate the selection of this technology and its correct sizing and to provide information on the regulations and energy incentives available, among other matters. Cooperation The efforts made by local and regional public authorities, citizens and businesses located in the regional territory will be supplemented by cooperation between the regional government and other stakeholders. The government undertakes to: - encourage the public building services of the federal, Flemish, Community, European and international authorities that have buildings in the regional territory to invest in energy production from renewable energy sources at their Brussels sites; - as a priority, conclude cooperation agreements with neighbouring regions with a view to directly investing in installations for the generation of renewable electricity (in particular using solar or wind energy) outside the region);                                                            100 These are photovoltaic modules integrated into elements of the buildings such as windows, cladding, tiles, etc. 194 - urge the Federal Government to reduce VAT on the most efficient heat pumps (installation and equipment), on thermal and photovoltaic solar equipment and its installation, as well as on the supply of renewable electricity.  3.1.3. Other elements of the decarbonisation dimension xx. Where applicable, national policies and measures affecting the EU ETS sector and assessment of the complementarity and impacts on the EU ETS Flemish Region The climate objective for Member States is to reduce GHG emissions from sectors not covered by the emissions trading system (EU ETS). The transport, building, agriculture, non-ETS industry and waste sectors are therefore the subject of debate. In Flanders, approximately 200 installations in the electricity sector and energy-intensive industry fall under the EU ETS. For every tonne of CO2 emitted, they must surrender one emission allowance, which incentivises them to use CO2-efficient production techniques. Given that, at European level, the number of emission allowances is limited, total European CO2 emissions always remain within the pre-established cap. In 2030, this cap will be 43% less than in 2005, meaning that the EU ETS sector is making considerable efforts to reduce GHG emissions. In Flanders we have always argued for a sufficiently ambitious EU ETS, with the CO2 price providing a real incentive for low-carbon investments. At the same time, the competitiveness of energy-intensive industry needs to be preserved through a sufficiently protective carbon leakage framework. The recent reform of the EU ETS, which established the basic rules for the period 2021-2030, is in line with these fundamental principles.  xxi. Policies and measures to achieve other national targets, where applicable Federal State  Implementation of the National Adaptation Plan and its updates. A national adaptation action plan was adopted in 2017 (101). This plan identifies specific adaptation measures that must be taken at national level over the 2017-2020 period in order to strengthen cooperation and develop adaptation synergies between the various entities (federal level, regions).  Implementation of the federal contribution to the National Adaptation Plan, adopted on 28 October 2016, and its updates. This federal contribution aims to mobilise the federal levers and instruments for conducting a coordinated adaptation policy. It identifies 12 federal adaptation actions. These actions form part of a process of Cross-cutting measures aimed at coherently integrating adaptation in various fields/policies and raising awareness and understanding of the issues are also identified. NB: The measures identified in the adaptation plan will not have a direct impact on GHGs. In the context of the identification of measures, the risk of maladaptation has been taken into consideration to avoid adaptation measures leading to an increase in vulnerability (e.g. by increasing GHG emissions).  Integration of sustainable development in administration contracts.  Setting of a good example through purchases (e.g. hardware and equipment).  Optimisation of the criteria for public tenders (carbon clauses).  Digital operation of authorities, continuation of the digitisation of government, streamlining of procedures, one-stop shops, paperless offices.                                                            101 National Climate Commission, 2017. National Adaptation Plan for Belgium. https://www.climat.be/index.php/download_file/view/1958/1205/ 195  Flemish Region A Flemish Adaptation Plan 2021-2030 will be drawn up as part of the Flemish Climate Plan 2021-2030. The adaptation plan will be based on the measures and results of the current Flemish Adaptation Plan 2013-2020, nce to the consequences of climate change and better adapting to its expected effects. Work will also continue on identifying based on the results already achieved and further insights. Adapting to the effects of climate change requires a comprehensive and integrated approach in all sectors, with a view to maximising the synergies between adaptation and mitigation and with other policy objectives.  Walloon Region Like other regions around the world, Wallonia is being affected by climate change: general rise in temperatures, changes to rainfall patterns, extreme events, etc. This is in turn generating a series of impacts: increase in flooding and soil erosion risks, increase in heatwaves and droughts, emergence and spread of diseases, etc. All these impacts were identified, assessed and quantified in 2011 and 2014 through studies assessing the impacts of climate change on Wallonia and its vulnerability (ECORES & TEC, 2011), ICEDD, 2014) (102). Based on those assessments, initial adaptation measures for various sectors were identified and set out in the Air, Climate and Energy Plan (PACE) 2016-2022. Some were incorporated within existing tools (Flood Risk Management Plans, Walloon Forest Health Observatory, etc.), while others formed the basis for new tools  Those measures clearly have to continue after 2022, which must be guaranteed by this plan to 2030. Some existing measures will therefore continue as they are, while others will be updated; however, new measures must also be identified. This is particularly the case with the Flood Risk Management Plans (second cycle) 2022-2027, which will take account of climate change. As regards the forestry sector, the Walloon Forestry Code sets out a series of measures to promote the sustainable development of woods and forests. Particular measures include maintaining a balance between softwood and hardwood trees, and promoting mixed forests with trees of different ages, which are adapted to climate change and capable of mitigating some of its effects. Recommendations for forest managers were published in 2017 in order to propose specific actions taking account of climate change; those recommendations partly stemmed from forest research. The Walloon Forest Health Observatory monitors and ensures the health of forests in collaboration with neighbouring countries. It has been particularly active in recent years due to beetle infestations in the Ardennes (500,000 m³ of trees were infected in Wallonia in 2018, with this figure likely to double and reach 1,000,000 m³ in 2019). Lastly, various research studies are currently being carried out to help forests adapt to climate change (see point 3.1.1(i)). Agriculture has been particularly affected by climate change in recent years. The 2017 drought was acknowledged as an agricultural disaster in all Walloon municipalities, with the total cost of the damage estimated at nearly EUR 130 million. There was also a drought in 2018, which continued in 2019. Agronomic research must be supported and aimed at farming practices, varietal selections and even new crops that can adapt to these drier conditions and water stress, and also to the diseases and pests fuelled by climate change. Conversely, heavy rainfall leads to mud flows, erosion and therefore soil loss. The GISER unit (which advises on the integrated management of soil, erosion and runoff) of the SPW ARNE (Walloon Public Service for Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment) works with municipalities and farmers to combat erosion, runoff and mud flows. Between 2011 and 2015, it was called out over a hundred times to around 400 different sites. Over this                                                            102 ECORES & TEC. (2011). Région wallonne -  en Région wallonne. ICEDD. (2014).  196 period, around 100 projects were carried out to reduce erosion and mud flows, including over 8 km of linear features (grass strips, weirs, banks, ditches, etc.). waves and ozone ; its aim is to communicate and remind people of the steps to take, provide specific assistance to the elderly, who are often isolated, and generally raise awareness. The Walloon Environment and Health Plan 2009-2023 also takes direct account of climate change through measures such as monitoring and combating non-indigenous mosquitos, tick-borne diseases, and spores and pollens, which are all influenced by climate change. In terms of energy, climate change is affecting levels of production and forms of consumption in parallel with the efforts made in this plan. Wallonia is therefore working with the other regions to identify the impacts of climate change on security of supply (see national measure). Biodiversity and ecosystem services  which have already been weakened by habitat fragmentation, species disappearance, arrival of invasive species, etc.  are being heavily impacted by climate change. Efforts to develop ecological networks must therefore be continued and stepped up. These are natural and semi-natural ecosystems, and also replacement habitats, that can meet the vital requirements of species and their populations. These areas of green infrastructure are also needed to develop a wide variety of ecosystem services that can regulate the effects of human activities. Developing blue and green corridors enables habitats to be connected and reinforces ecosystems so that they become more resilient to the effects of climate change in particular. Replanting hedges in the countryside, planting trees and agroforestry have a key role to play in adaptation due to their many positive effects. In the rural environment, they can prevent mud flows, provide safe areas and homes for various species, produce biomass for energy purposes (recovery of hedge trimmings), produce timber or horticultural crops, contribute to carbon storage, increase biodiversity, provide areas of shade for livestock, structure the landscape, etc. There is also a place for green infrastructure in the urban environment, as this can help to better manage rainwater and combat urban heat islands: green roofs, tree planting and/or permeable ground (in particular surfaces of car parks) are all good examples. Spatial planning must take account of the impacts of climate change on the territory at both the regional and municipal levels. Under the Covenant of Mayors, there is increasing collaboration between these two levels as, in addition to the energy and GHG reduction aspects, this agreement also covers the aspect of adapting to climate change. A tool has been developed in Wallonia  approach  to help municipalities understand and assess the impacts of climate change on their territory. This tool has been publicised via the POLLEC (local energy and climate policy) campaigns and is therefore being used by a number of municipalities. It contains a series of action fiches and example projects to inspire municipalities and exchange knowledge so that actions can be developed on the ground. The plan is obviously to continue promoting and constantly improve this tool. As regards disaster risk management, Wallonia is working with the other Belgian entities under the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. Joint work is being carried out within the Sendai national platform by various experts from different disciplines (crisis centres, defence, etc.). Experts on adapting to climate change are also involved so that the impacts of climate change can be taken into account. Cross-border cooperation is also ongoing, particularly within Benelux. Specific workshops on the impacts of climate change on health, transport and energy have enabled information to be exchanged and lessons learnt to be shared. This cooperation is planned to continue for the next few years. Lastly, communication, awareness-raising and education actions on climate change are regularly carried out to make stakeholders and the general public aware of the impacts of climate change and the steps that need to be taken in order to adapt. For example, educational kits on the climate have been produced for primary students in years 5 and 6. These kits have already been sent to schools and are available to order and on the internet. The following table sets out the 15 adaptation actions to be implemented. 197 Summary table of the 15 adaptation actions Actions Sectors Associated impacts 1 Flood Risk Management Plans (second cycle) 2022-2027 Spatial planning, Agriculture, Water management Flooding 2 Walloon Forestry Code, sustainable management of forests adapted to climate change Forests Weakening of forest stands 3 Recommendations to forest managers Forests Weakening of forest stands  4 Walloon Forest Health Observatory Forests Diseases and parasites 5 Agronomic and forest research Research, Agriculture, Forests Rise in temperature, drought, etc. 6 Advice and opinions of the GISER unit Agriculture Erosion and mud flows; flooding 7 Heatwaves and Ozone Peaks Plan Health Heatwave 8 Environment and Health Plan 2019-2023 Health Increase in vector-borne and respiratory diseases 9 Security of energy supply Energy Rise in temperature, flooding, etc. 10 Develop ecological networks and green and blue corridors Biodiversity, Spatial planning Flooding, heatwave, drought, etc. 11 Planting, afforestation and agroforestry Agriculture, Spatial planning Erosion, flooding, drought, heatwave 12 Support for the Covenant of Mayors Towns and municipalities Flooding, heatwave 13 Crisis management and link with disaster risk reduction Cross-cutting  14 Communicate, raise awareness and educate on the impacts of climate change and the need to adapt Cross-cutting  15 Cross-border cooperation Cross-cutting  198 Brussels Capital Region Adaptation to climate change Although the climate change mitigation measures set out in this plan will limit the regional contribution to climate change, they will not be sufficient to prevent its current and future consequences. As a result, adaptation measures will be needed to mitigate the damage caused by this inevitable impact. In addition to the measures set out in the adaptation part of the Regional Air, Climate and Energy Plan, the government will therefore adopt a regional adaptation strategy anticipating the consequences of climate change and the associated environmental, economic and social risks.  xxii. Policies and measures to achieve low-emission mobility (including electrification of transport) Federal State Mobility framework  An interfederal cooperation agreement on mobility will be concluded by 1 January 2021, following consultations between the Federal State and the Regions on specific subjects (e.g. public transport, taxation of transport, etc.) for which an interfederal agreement is needed in order to implement certain measures included in this plan.  As part of the analysis to be made by 2021 of environmentally friendly energy taxation and in agreement between the federal and regional governments, the current or proposed regulatory framework on company cars will be reviewed and adjusted for new contracts in order to:  measure, and the cafeteria plan), with a view to continuous improvement in order to meet the energy and climate targets;  reduce the externalities associated with company cars (to combat air pollution and congestion, and improve road safety) by considering other reductions in labour costs, and also simplify the system;  green company car fleets (taking into account the CO2 targets for cars).  Options to be assessed for greening the fleet (following analysis):  The mass and power of the vehicle could be used in company car taxation, with a correction factor being applied for electric cars to take account of the additional weight of the battery. It would make sense for the same parameters to be used as in the Walloon and Brussels Capital Regions. The intention in the Walloon Region is to include the mass/power/CO2 in their revision of company car taxation.  The WLTP values could be used instead of the NEDC 2.0 values from 1 January 2021 without needing a correction factor.  The requirements around PHEVs could be reinforced: increase in the energy capacity of the batteries   Rail initiatives  For passengers  Optimise rail transport (competitiveness, meeting passenger expectations). In order to encourage a modal shift to rail transport and improve the rail offer, major investment will have to be made in the coming years to improve passenger transport by rail, namely: o complete the Regional Express Network (RER) by 2031 (primarily the four-track development of lines 161 and 124);  199 o equip the rail network with the European Train Control System (ETCS) (continuous train speed control and automatic braking system): from 2025 only ETCS-equipped trains will be able to travel on the Belgian rail network; o purchase new rolling stock (M7 double-deck carriages, etc.): investment of EUR 2 billion over the period 2018-2022 in order to modernise the fleet of carriages and locomotives, which will create an additional 20,000 seats by 2022 (including 10,000 by 2020); o modernise the Brussels-Luxembourg route by 2027;  o increase the capacity of the Ghent-Bruges route by 2024;  o improve access to Brussels South Charleroi Airport: Fleurus station by 2022;  o electrify line 19 between Mol and Hamont by 2020 and line L15 between Balen and Zonhoven by 2022.  For the other lines that have not yet been electrified, a cost-benefit study (financial, energy, environment) of a more sustainable alternative solution, such as complete electrification of both the infrastructure and operation of the rail network, will be carried out.  The possibility of running hydrogen trains or equipping electrical multiple units with batteries to cover short distances on non-electrified lines will be studied in 2020 (103).  Operational measures will also be adopted to improve the quality of the rail offer so that it is more user-friendly and attractive and so that the customer experience is enhanced (operating schedule and timetables, products and services, pricing policy and distribution). Multimodality will be encouraged as much as possible: improved access to stations for cyclists and pedestrians; harmonisation of timetables with those of other public transport services (intermodal platforms), etc. Together with the SNCB and Infrabel, the Federal Government will study the rail offer in the medium term with the aims of reaching consensus on how to operate the network in the future and determining, based on the future offer, the infrastructure investments to be prioritised. The budgets needed for these measures are estimated at EUR 35 billion for the period 2021-2030 (including revenue from the issue of green bonds) and will be confirmed in the next few years. This approach is expected to reduce annual CO2 emissions by around 1.5 million tonnes by 2030 compared with the WEM scenario. If annual CO2 emissions in 2015 are compared with the estimates for 2030 after the approach has been implemented, a reduction of around 3.7 million tonnes can be expected.  For freight  Encourage rail transport for freight transport. In order to increase the modal share of rail freight transport (from 12% currently to 20% in 2030), targeted investments must be made to improve the ability of rail freight transport to compete with other modes of transport: o carry out work so that 740-metre-long trains can run on the Belgian rail network and these trains can be handled at terminals by 2030; o improve the rail links of logistics platforms by 2030; o construct or repair missing links in the rail freight network by 2030; o increase the capacity of the Zeebrugge-Bruges route by 2031 and the Ghent-Bruges route by 2024; o improve the condition of support infrastructure by 2030.                                                            103 The specifications for this study (due to be carried out in 2020 by the SNCB) are currently being prepared. The study results will be provided to the Federal Public Service for Public Health and the Federal Public Service for the Economy. 200  In addition, measures relating to the operation or regulation of the rail network will also be implemented by 2030 to improve the attractiveness of rail freight transport: o revise the priority rules for the allocation of train paths; o create a neutral body to promote rail freight transport in the industrial and logistics sectors (following the example of the Netherlands); o update the rail freight subsidy mechanism beyond 2020 to encourage the modal shift of freight transport to rail transport: support for transshipment rather than the transport itself; o include specific provisions in the management contract with Infrabel to encourage the rail network operator to achieve these goals.  Budget and impact  The budgets currently planned for these measures (excluding the rail freight subsidy mechanism) total EUR 0.985 billion (including revenue from the issue of green bonds). An additional budget of EUR 135 million is planned for the rail freight subsidy mechanism. These budgets will be confirmed in the next few years.  This approach is expected to reduce annual CO2 emissions by around 0.7 million tonnes by 2030 compared with the WEM scenario. If annual CO2 emissions in 2015 are compared with the estimates for 2030 after the approach has been implemented, a reduction of around 1.6 million tonnes can be expected.  For both passengers and freight  The current inclusion of the rising costs of the energy transition in the electricity cost for rail transport will be reviewed so that the modal shift to more sustainable electric rail transport is not deterred.  Consideration will be given to how to reduce the electricity cost for rail transport (ETS, federal surcharges, etc.) so that the rail network can continue to be electrified and rail transport can become more competitive. The electricity cost is currently high and poses an obstacle to the modal shift needed to more electric-powered transport in general and to rail transport in particular. Following this study, measures will be taken to reduce the electricity cost for rail transport.  In terms of taxation  Assess the current tax framework for utility vehicles, e.g. pickups.  Reform the (para)fiscal framework to promote sustainable mobility and intermodality.  Enable the combination of an annual train pass with other active or collective modes of transport (multimodality) for a number of days per year. In other words, the tax benefits associated with an annual train pass could be combined, for the same journey, with (non-exhaustive list) the tax exemption for the bicycle allowance, the organised collective transport allowance or the allowances associated with other public transport for a limited number of days to be determined.  Establish a regulatory and tax framework at EU and national level aimed at reducing the weight of vehicles.  Urge the air transport sector to also make concrete commitments and develop a roadmap for substantially reducing the GHG emissions for which it is responsible. Achieving zero-emission air transport by 2050 should be the ambition of all countries.  201 Promotion of soft modes of transport  Call for a cross-cutting approach to bicycle transport at EU level (e.g.: VAT regulation reform, CEF funding for bicycle infrastructure projects and development of an EU bicycle policy).   Improve action to tackle bicycle theft (e.g. monitoring and/or Velo-P.  Produce national statistics on bicycle use and trends.  In the context of the investment pact, construct 600 km of bicycle highways in the three regions.  Etc.  Promotion of new technologies  Develop vessels, heavy goods vehicles and public transport powered by CNG and LNG as a transitional technology. A  Car-related measures  Standardise tyres and fuels.  Promote car-sharing, carpooling and remote working. Support for carpooling and car-sharing entails harmonising/simplifying the (para)fiscal framework, organising promotional and awareness-raising campaigns, supporting private initiatives and including initiatives in Mobility as a Service (MaaS).  Facilitate the development of shared autonomous vehicles in Belgium.  In order to contribute to e-mobility targets, the Régie des Bâtiments (Government Buildings Agency) will include provisions in its contracts that aim to equip buildings for electromobility. By 2025, where technically feasible, a charging point for electric vehicles will be installed in at least one in five parking spaces at federal government buildings. The installation of charging points in SNCB station car parks will also be specified when drafting the next SNCB management contracts, with relevant targets being set in these contracts. Furthermore, easily accessible and secure parking for environmentally friendly one- and two-wheel vehicles ((electric) bicycles, (electric) scooters, mopeds and electric motorcycles, etc.) will be provided at as many federal buildings as possible so that visitors and employees can more easily travel in an environmentally friendly manner. By 2023, charging points for electric one- and two-wheel vehicles will be installed at all buildings managed by the Régie des Bâtiments.  FEDERAL VEHICLE FLEET  Objective: zero-emission vehicles.  The first measure will involve minimising the size of the vehicle fleet, in particular by not replacing certain vehicles or by offering softer mobility alternatives where practical (electric bicycles or scooters for example). the number of vehicles.  When replacing vehicles, federal services will favour low-carbon or zero-carbon models (electric, CNG, hybrid, hydrogen and other vehicles) that are more energy efficient and lighter, where this is possible depending on the intended use of the vehicle.  The most recent report of the CIDD (Interdepartmental Commission for Sustainable Development) reviewing the federal (federal public services and public planning services) vehicle fleet (cars / vans / lorries / minibuses / motorcycles / other vehicles) dates from 2016 (2015 data). At that time, only just over 1% of vehicles were not in updated. 202  A plan to replace all the vehicles in the existing fleet will be produced by all federal public services, which will enable group purchases (purchase or leasing; economies of scale for vehicles regarded as more expensive).  Timetable  By 2030.  Budget  Each public service establishes its own budget in this respect, which makes it difficult to obtain an overview of this item. The data in the CIDD report do not allow the costs to be easily extrapolated.  Decisions  Set a target and implementation scenarios for 2030.  A Federal Mobility Action Plan must be produced by the ministers responsible for sustainable development, mobility and public service.  Action points: 1- The Minister for Sustainable Development will ask the IFDD (Federal Institute for Sustainable Development) to update the study on the state of the federal vehicle fleet by 2020/2021. 2-   July 2009 must be adapted and brought into line with the Clean Vehicles Directive so that outdated standards can be eliminated as quickly as possible. 3- The BOSA (Federal Public Service for Policy and Support) framework contract with the supplier (currently CMS) will be reassessed and checked to see if it sets strict enough conditions. 4- Other contracts with suppliers will also be reassessed.  The Ministry of Defence has set itself the target of at least 25% of its passenger vehicle fleet consisting of environmentally friendly vehicles (176 CNG, hybrid or electric vehicles out of 702 vehicles) by 2030, with a budget of EUR 422,400 per year.  Drivers will also be trained in eco-driving and their vehicles will be fitted with driving behaviour monitoring systems by 2030 (EUR 500,000 per year).   Rail-related measures  Reduce the traction energy consumption by 4% per passenger-kilometre in 2022 compared with 2017, which will primarily be achieved through: o eco-driving; o eco- o introducing more energy-efficient equipment; o increasing or at least stabilising train occupancy rates;  o carrying out a stud-effectiveness of replacing diesel trains by electrifying other lines] (the current level of electrification is 89.9%); o carrying out a cost-benefit study on the electrification of the entire Belgian rail network and the ,515 km of main tracks of which 5,857 km are electrified. The merits of electrifying the remaining lines therefore need to be studied.  The federal authorities will ensure that the SNCB remains an attractive alternative compared with other modes of transport by taking account of the electricity cost for rail transport (ETS, federal and regional surcharges, etc.). The relevant federal authorities will consider this issue, preferably in cooperation with 203 neighbouring countries, taking into account the fact that the cost of the different modes of transport reflects all the associated costs.  Consider reducing the electricity cost for rail transport (ETS, federal and regional surcharges, etc.).  Air and maritime transport-related measures  Study of emissions in the transport sectors in Belgium that are under federal responsibility and analysis of potential measures for reducing GHG-emitting fuel. Continue to call for zero-emission maritime transport by 2050, in the context of the COP and the IMO. Urge the air transport sector to also make concrete commitments and develop a roadmap for substantially reducing the GHG emissions for which it is responsible. Achieving zero-emission air transport by 2050 should be the ambition of all countries.  In terms of investment aid  The National Pact for Strategic Investments states that most of the public investment will be made in maintaining and developing integrated transport services and networks. The total investment in these proposals is estimated at around EUR 20-24 billion. The cost of maintenance is estimated at approximately EUR 9 billion and the cost of network development at approximately EUR 13 billion. Of this amount, around EUR 7 billion relates to investment in rail infrastructure for freight and passengers, EUR 2 billion in inland waterways and EUR 3 billion in other transport projects. Private sources, including public-private partnership (PPP) structures and/or tolls, will fund 14%. Figure 5: Total investment in mobility to 2030 (source: National Pact for Strategic Investments)   2030 Milliards EUR, entre 2019-30 Total investment in mobility to 2030 EUR billions, 2019-2030 204 Publics Public Privés Private Entretenir et développer des réseaux et des services de transport intégrés Maintaining and developing integrated transport services and networks Faciliter les solutions de mobilité intelligente Facilitating intelligent mobility solutions Gérer la demande de transport Managing transport demand Etablir un cadre de soutien Establishing a support framework Total Total SOURCE: Pacte National pour les Investissements Stratégiques SOURCE: National Pact for Strategic Investments  Flemish Region For road transport, see the section on GHG emissions and removals  transport sector.   International aviation and shipping  Overview of the situation GHG emissions that stem from international bunkering (i.e. fuel deliveries to international air and maritime transport) are not included in the non-ETS climate target for Member States for the period 2021-2030. Demand in these two sectors is driven by international factors rather than local factors (including tourism and extensive globalisation of trade) and competition in these sectors is also very international in nature. For those reasons, reducing greenhouse gases in these sectors should preferably be organised at a global level. Flanders relies heavily on the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) for its policy. It is crucial that action is also taken in these two sectors. In 2016, international aviation and shipping were each responsible for around 12% of total GHG emissions from transport in the EU, and this share is expected to grow in the current policy scenario due to increasing demand for international passenger and freight transport. In the last few years, the IMO and the ICAO have taken important decisions and measures to reduce GHG emissions from the bunkering sectors: - within the IMO: o EEDI (Energy Efficiency Design Index) for new vessels; o MRV (Monitoring, Reporting and Verification): fuel consumption obligations for all vessels > 500 GT; o adoption of an initial GHG reduction strategy with an absolute reduction target of at least -50% by 2050 compared with 2008 emissions, and relative reduction targets of at least -40% by 2030 and at least -70% by 2050 (CO2 per tonne-mile), both compared with 2008; - within the ICAO: o resolution on carbon-neutral growth from 2020 (CNG 2020); o CORSIA (Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation) implementing the CNG 2020 resolution, which will start in 2021 and cover approximately 90% of all international aviation emissions;  o CO2 standard for new aircraft. As for the EU, it has adopted additional measures to remedy the sometimes limited level of ambition and tardiness of the IMO and the ICAO in the past. Since 2012, intra-EEA (European Economic Area) flights have come under the EU emissions trading system, with CO2 emissions being limited in the 2013-2020 period to 90% of the 2004-2006 level. Since 2018, there has been 205 a European system for mandatory monitoring, reporting and verification of CO2 emissions from maritime transport. Measures have also been adopted in the Flemish Region, such as the promotion of energy-efficient vessels and alternative fuels (e.g. supply of LNG to vessels). The Port of Antwerp has also applied measures in the form of reduced tonnage dues for vessels with a positive Environmental Ship Index (ESI), which takes into account CO2 emissions among other aspects. Considerable efforts are also being made to supply shoreside power to vessels while moored in port (e.g. at the Port of Antwerp).  Measures in 2021-2030 Despite the efforts already made, further actions are needed in the 2021-2030 period to make international aviation and shipping compatible with achieving the general long-term goals of the Paris Agreement. These measures will focus on the following aspects, among others: 1) Aim for climate transition within the IMO and the ICAO In conjunction with the other Belgian entities within the IMO and the ICAO, Flanders will continue working towards short-term measures to enable the bunkering sectors to transition to a climate-friendly society, through both operational and technical measures and also market-based measures. 2) Support an ambitious European policy for the aviation sector International aviation (= outgoing flights from the EU) is included in NDC (National Determined Contribution) under the Paris Agreement and is therefore part of the European target to reduce GHG emissions by 40% by 2030 compared with 1990. An additional European policy  with a higher level of ambition than CORSIA currently proposes  will therefore also be needed after 2020 for international aviation. 3) Research the possibility of carbon pricing for aviation  Fiscal policy can play a crucial role in rationalising the demand for, and the cost of, international air and maritime transport. The Flemish Region would support initiatives taken at the European level to introduce harmonised carbon pricing for aviation. 4) Research how Flanders can contribute to the supply of climate-friendly fuels  The potential of pure electric power and batteries is relatively limited in these sectors, given the large amounts of energy consumed by seagoing vessels during their journeys and the fact that aircraft need to remain relatively light. Even in the long term (up to 2050), aviation and shipping will remain at least partly dependent on liquid fuels. The development, availability in large quantities and sale of climate-friendly fuels, which can prove their sustainability throughout their life cycle, are becoming vitally important and also offer opportunities at an economic level. Flanders will therefore study how to take maximum advantage of these opportunities and how it can contribute to an increased supply of advanced biofuels and synthetic fuels based on renewable energy storage for aviation and shipping. 5) Agreements to reduce the impact of aviation and shipping on the climate by 2050 In consultation with the sectors (ports, airports, shipowners, airlines) and stakeholders, agreements may be concluded to improve the sustainability of aviation and shipping more quickly in Flanders. The aim will be to work with the sectors to identify and implement viable best practices in the best way possible. The resulting commitments could be included in the voluntary action plans requested by the IMO and the ICAO.  206 xxiii. Where applicable, national policies, timelines and measures planned to phase out energy subsidies, in particular for fossil fuels Federal State In collaboration with other EU Member States, Belgium will gradually discontinue financial investment in, and support for, fossil fuels. It will produce an inventory of all fossil fuel subsidies, to be submitted to the European Commission by the end of 2020. By 2021, Belgium will produce an action plan for gradually removing fossil fuel subsidies; this will take particular account of the cadjustment measures to accompany the transition to a carbon-neutral society.  Shifting of charges for fossil  below).  Continuation and refinement of federal support for businesses under energy contracts or branch agreements in order to sufficiently incentivise industry to agree to additional efforts by 2030, taking into account a level playing field within the EU in terms of continuous improvement, sufficient reporting, avoidance of a lock-in and accelerated phasing-out of fossil fuel subsidies.   