318 3.5. Dimension research, innovation and competitiveness General information in relation to the Energy Union is aimed at supporting the general objectives of EU energy policy in terms of energy security, sustainability and competitiveness. In addition, the R&I policy encourages innovation in and by Belgian businesses in order to boost their competitiveness. Belgium is convinced that a common European approach is necessary to achieve the EU strategy for a resilient Energy Union with a forward-looking climate policy. erefore closely linked to the priorities of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan). Within the framework of the SET Plan, Belgium (both the Federal State and the Regions) is working with other SET  key actions. This definition will be followed by R&I activities (as defined in the implementation plans) to achieve those strategic objectives. This will involve national and regional R&I programmes and/or co-financing of EU programmes, such as participation in ERA-NET co-financing activities. At international level, Belgium is a member of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the International Energy Agency (IEA). Belgium (both the Federal State and the Regions) participates in various IEA programmes for technological collaboration. Responsibility for R&I policy in relation to the Energy Union in Belgium is shared between the Federal Government, the three Regions and the Communities. The Federal State is responsible for R&I in the field of nuclear energy (nuclear fission and fusion) and in other areas under federal jurisdiction  such as renewable energy in the Belgian Exclusive Economic Zone of the North Sea, biofuels, security of supply and network balancing  and is also responsible for funding research in federal scientific institutions in support of climate policy. The Regions are primarily responsible for R&I in relation to non-nuclear energy. The Communities are responsible for research policy in universities. On 11 December 2017, the Federal Minister for Energy and the energy ministers of the three Regions reached an agreement on a Belgian Interfederal Energy Pact, which is a common vision for the energy transition to 2030 and 2050. To ensure that Belgian industry remains competitive and to protect jobs, an Energy Standard will be introduced for energy-intensive businesses. At administrative level, the BELSET platform has been set up between the federal and regional authorities. This is an informal consultation platform for all issues relating to the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan), which is the overarching European strategy for R&I in energy technologies. BELSET was created in order to allow productive consultations between policy advisers for energy technology R&I (CIS-Energy) and energy policy advisers (CONCERE/ENOVER) involved in the follow-up to the European SET Plan.  i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.5  Federal State  R&D is extremely important because the 2030-2050 objectives will not be achievable unless significant technological progress is made. In order for new technologies to emerge, due emphasis must also be placed on the qualification of human capital. An interfederal platform will be created to ensure that the projects and activities funded by the various entities are coherent and to develop synergies between research centres. The aim of this platform will be to disseminate information on research programmes and studies. Progress reports and findings will be made available to higher education establishments and universities, businesses and organisations active in the field of energy. In cooperation with the Regions, the Federal Government will develop a clear, coordinated and collaborative research programme. This will include wide-ranging impact studies on crucial aspects of energy and climate policy (including the impact on sustainable development indicators, the impact on costs and benefits of investments, and the socioeconomic impact of climate change) and also studies on financial governance with an 319 impact on consumer and producer behaviour (taxation, spatial planning, mobility and transport, standards, etc.). Within this framework, it is vital that cooperation between the political levels in Belgium is as integrated as possible rmore, the specific socioeconomic aspects of each region must always be taken into account. This programme will be accompanied by national objectives and funding objectives for research, innovation and competitiveness, particularly as regards the Energy Union. Those objectives must be easily measurable and appropriate in terms of helping to achieve the objectives of the other dimensions of the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan.  Research fields Innovation in the field of storage will mainly involve flexibility, renewable energy sources and energy efficiency. It will generally consist of minor improvements in, or further development of, existing technologies, processes needed. The key challenge will be to intelligently combine and integrate a range of innovations. In addition to technological innovation, social innovation should also be encouraged. Changes in habits and culture can have a major impact, such as more grouped housing instead of separate housing, urbanisation, fewer car purchases and a transition to more sustainable consumer goods. Social partners have identified the following research priorities:  Greening and storage of gas Power-to-gas technology results in synergies between the electricity and gas systems, and offers an effective solution for seasonal electricity storage. However, a cost-benefit analysis of such technology is needed in the light of other renewable energy sources and energy efficiency. The production and deployment of these forms of renewable energy should be encouraged, in particular through which can then be converted into guarantees of origin for electricity or green heat, depending on how the green gas is used.  Training to support the energy transition - in all sectors will be created as part of the transition to a low-carbon economy and will be analysed in the context of training and retraining needs: - in sectors involving energy generation and, in particular, the decommissioning of nuclear power plants; - in the transport sector and, more specifically, in the area of vehicle electrification; - in the construction sector, in particular as regards the promotion of cross-cutting professional qualifications in the field of the energy renovation of buildings; - in sectors involving the use of intelligent networks and the intelligent management of networks; - in the processing sectors.  Impact of the transition on state finances The impact of the transition to a low-carbon economy on policy funding and any measures to be adopted will be analysed, and more specifically: - the impact of vehicle consumption and local energy businesses on the funding of system costs and social and environmental measures (due to the reduction in the quantity of kWh consumed in the conventional system); - the impact of the reduction in petrol and diesel consumption on public revenue due to the development of clean vehicles. It is important to ensure diversification of the funding base and consistency between financial instruments, because the energy transition will go beyond electricity and the reduction of energy consumption will erode funding based on kWh. 320  Technological innovations See the Energy Pact. However, such innovations are mainly the responsibility of the Regions. Potential federal responsibilities are as follows (which may or may not be shared with the Regions):  circular economy;  new, more efficient and large-scale methods of renewable energy generation, such as wind energy, wave energy, tidal energy, etc.;  efficient storage technologies;  use of renewable energy in transport: more sustainable biofuels (algae- or waste-based), sustainable biogas- or biofuel-based maritime and air transport, third-generation biofuels;  power-to-X.  Flemish Region  Introduction The energy transition coupled with a future-oriented climate change policy offers opportunities and requires technological and social innovations in every sector. In this respect, Flanders aims to be a pioneer in the area of research and innovation.  By supporting basic and strategic scientific research, Flanders wants to ensure a high level of knowledge in and for our society, forming a solid basis for developing long-term solutions to the major challenges facing society. The research and innovation policy will also focus on supporting new and existing economic activities developed in response to the energy and climate challenges, and on helping to maintain and reinforce a local manufacturing industry that can position itself within sustainable value chains at European and international level. Lastly, the research and innovation policy will be targeted at helping to achieve the Flemish energy and climate objectives, by supporting the necessary social and economic transitions. Flanders has many assets, including a high level of education and broad scientific and technological expertise within universities, knowledge institutions and businesses, both multinationals and SMEs. The Flemish innovation policy will be targeted in terms of offering businesses and knowledge institutions the opportunity to develop their innovations and bring them to market. Cross-sectoral cooperation is fundamentally important in this respect. Small-scale demonstration projects in low-traffic areas will be facilitated with a view to developing them further. In addition to technological innovation, sufficient attention will be paid to social innovation, for example through new forms of investment (energy cooperatives, ESCOs, crowdfunding, etc.). The climate and energy transition is therefore a major opportunity for Flanders to position itself as a top region for research and innovation in all sectors of our society. The current research and innovation policy supports the Vision 2050 priorities in a number of ways. This vision document from 2016 arranges the strategic vision of the Flemish Government into seven transitions, including the energy transition, which is closely linked to a future-oriented climate change policy. Other transitions that are also closely linked involve the built environment (Slim Wonen en Leven(Smart Living and Life) transition), transport (mobility transition) and industry (circular economy transition and industry 4.0 transition). For all these societal challenges, the research and innovation instruments of the Flemish financing agencies FWO and VLAIO can be broadly deployed. There is also structural financing available for the Strategic Research Centres (VITO, IMEC and Flanders Make), which can all help in their own way to develop technologies for the energy transition and climate policy through their strategic research programmes. The current cluster policy provides thematic support for networking in Flanders by funding 6 pilot clusters and 20 innovative business networks, some of which are focusing on the innovative solutions and technological breakthroughs needed to achieve the energy transition and climate policy. Since the summer of 2017, there has 321 also been an open call for cluster projects that fit with the goals of the energy transition, circular economy and industry 4.0 priorities of Vision 2050. Moonshot was also launched in 2019, as the spearhead for innovation in Flemish energy and climate policy. Its aim is to identify and support research and innovation for a low-CO2 industry by 2050. In terms of innovation, the Catalisti and Flux50 spearhead clusters will give real substance to the Flemish Moonshot, together with other spearheads. European and international cooperation is a constant priority in Flemish research and innovation policy. The energy and climate challenges that we are facing are global challenges that require an overarching European and international approach, especially as regards research and innovation. Only by strengthening European and international cooperation in the area of research and innovation will we be able to speed up the development of cutting-edge technologies. Strategic coordination of Flemish research and innovation policy with European and international developments is therefore essential. In this context, Flanders fully supports the strategy and objectives of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan), which is acknowledged throughout Europe as the research and innovation pillar for achieving the goals of the Energy Union. Flanders is currently using its scientific and technological strengths to participate in a number of joint European projects co-financed by Europe (European ERA-NET Cofund scheme) in order to achieve the common objectives of the SET Plan.   Policies Boosting research and development in the area of energy and climate We are aiming for a balanced research and innovation policy that covers both long-term non-specific scientific research and more targeted basic and strategic research in order to develop and roll out innovations. Through strategic and innovative scientific research, Flanders wants to ensure a high level of knowledge in and for our society, forming a solid basis for developing long-term solutions to the major challenges facing society. The research and innovation policy will also focus on supporting new and existing economic activities developed in response to the energy and climate challenges, and on helping to maintain and reinforce a local manufacturing industry that can position itself within sustainable value chains at European and international level. Lastly, the research and innovation policy will aim to support the social and economic transitions needed to achieve the Flemish energy and climate objectives.  Encouraging research and development (R&D) in the area of energy and climate through the regular R&D instruments  The regular instruments of the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) and the Flemish Agency for Innovation and Entrepreneurship (VLAIO) fund research and development in all research areas, including energy and climate. The FWO funds basic and strategic scientific research carried out in all scientific areas by universities and research centres in the Flemish community. It also encourages cooperation between Flemish universities and other research institutions. The FWO funds both excellent research projects and promising researchers following an inter-university competition and an assessment by foreign and domestic experts. As the contact point for businesses in Flanders, the VLAIO encourages and supports innovation and entrepreneurship and helps to develop a favourable economic climate. In the area of research and innovation, it grants subsidies for research and development projects. The VLAIO also supports development projects in the later stages of the innovation process (pilot phase). Furthermore, it provides support through advice, training and encouragement of coordination and networking. VLAIO subsidies are granted to projects in all research and innovation areas, including energy and climate, following an assessment based on the innovativeness and added economic value for Flanders. Further to the request made by the Flemish Parliament in its climate resolution, the budgets for innovation will be increased and a climate- and energy-friendly industry policy will be promoted. 322 Public funding of research and innovation projects in the area of energy and climate will start to be monitored in 2020 (reference measure). Priority areas: - Increasing Flemish R&D involvement in the SET Plan and the International Energy Agency (IEA) An international dimension is essential for research and innovation policy in Flanders. The themes of energy and climate are global challenges that require a global approach, especially in the area of research and innovation. Only through a joint commitment and stronger European and international cooperation in the area of research and innovation will we be able to speed up the development of innovative technologies. Flanders will continue its efforts to support the strategic objectives of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan), which aims to expedite the development and market roll-out of low-carbon technologies. As a result of its scientific and technological strengths, Flanders has helped to define the key R&I actions and strategic objectives of the SET Plan, allowing it to take an active role in their implementation through European, national and/or regional funding instruments. Flanders is currently active within the following working groups for implementing the SET Plan (IWGs): Photovoltaics, Energy systems, Energy efficiency in buildings, Energy efficiency in industry, and Batteries. The overarching strategy of the SET Plan is helping to define the outlines of the European funding programmes for research and development (Horizon 2020 and Horizon Europe, and the 9th EU Framework Programme for Research and development). Flanders is therefore reinforcing its position (in terms of both the Flemish research community and businesses) in these programmes. As a result, Flemish and Belgian research communities have joined forces within the Belgian Energy Research Alliance (BERA) in order to improve cooperation on research and streamline all the research efforts in the area of low-CO2 technologies in Belgium. BERA is involved in this respect in the EERA (European Energy Research Alliance) and the research pillar of the SET Plan, which has the same objective at European level. Flanders is also participating in the European ERA-NET Cofund actions (joint European R&D calls for proposals and projects with European co-financing). Furthermore, Flanders is currently participating in a range of ERA-Net Cofund projects linked to the SET Plan, such as SOLAR-ERA.NET Cofund, ERA-NET Smart Grids Plus and RegSYS ERA-NET (integrated regional smart energy systems). As regards clusters, a European and international dimension is an important part of their competitiveness programme. European and international strategic research cooperation is after all crucial for further developing our know-how and expertise and for speeding up the market roll-out of energy solutions. Clusters will therefore play a vital role in highlighting the Flemish energy industry on the global stage. Through the International Energy Agency (IEA), Flanders is participating in various Technology Collaboration Programmes that are strategically important for Flanders.  - Helping to digitise the energy system Over the next few decades, digital technologies will make our energy system more connected, intelligent, efficient, reliable and sustainable. Digitised energy systems will be able to identify those customers needing energy and supply this at the right time, in the right place and at the lowest possible cost. However, digitisation will also pose new challenges: new risks to security and privacy, a significant annual increase in the energy consumption of computers, servers, data centres, etc. The main advantage of digitisation lies in its capacity to remove barriers between traditional sectors, increase flexibility and facilitate integration between systems. The electricity sector is at the heart of this transformation, because digitisation reinforces the link between generation and consumption and creates interdependent opportunities: smart response to demand, integration of variable renewable energy sources, use of domestic batteries and smart charging of electric vehicles, and emergence of small-scale electricity sources, whether or not coupled within a micro-network. Digitisation and the energy transition are inevitable and will begin in Flanders with the introduction of smart meters from 2019. Elia has therefore launched one of the first European pilot projects for blockchains in the energy sector. It is vital that everyone in Flanders (citizens, businesses, etc.) reaps the fruit of this digitisation. User participation in the energy system will be facilitated by digital tools, ranging from participatory geographical systems to web portals and social networks, the Internet of Things (IoT), the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), 323 megadata, blockchains, digital twin technologies, etc. Close attention will be paid to these aspects, both in terms of the existing Flemish innovation instruments and Flemish cluster policy (including FLUX50) and in terms of the European instruments (Horizon Europe, SET Plan, etc.).  Structural financing of strategic research through the Strategic Research Centres The Strategic Research Centres receive an annual subsidy to carry out basic strategic research in their particular area. Through its structural financing of the SOC VITO, the Flemish Government demonstrates the importance that it places on a research centre focusing on sustainable development and innovation in clean technology. IMEC (photovoltaic technology, research into batteries and ICTs with specific applications for the energy transition and smart cities) and Flanders Make (energy efficient process technologies and products) are also helping to develop technologies and innovate in terms of the energy transition and climate policy. Energyville is a collaborative research project between the Catholic University of Leuven, VITO, IMEC and Hasselt University in the area of renewable energy and intelligent energy systems, particularly for towns and cities.  Cluster policy The Flemish cluster policy is an important lever for reinforcing the position of Flemish businesses on the regional and international markets. It is one of the components of economic policy and innovation policy, and therefore supplements the normal range of R&D support instruments for (individual) businesses. Recent cluster policy has led to the creation of several innovative business networks (IBNs) and pilot clusters, which, through cross-sectoral cooperation, will focus on developing innovative breakthrough technologies, services and processes connected with socially important themes that have economic added value for Flemish businesses, in particular the social challenge of the energy transition coupled with a climate-proof society. The spearhead clusters and innovative business networks are benefiting from organisational support. In addition, funds reserved for cluster projects have been released for spearhead clusters. Since the summer of 2017, there has also been an open call for cluster projects that fit with the goals of the energy transition, circular economy and industry 4.0 priorities of Vision 2050. This policy, including the calls for transition priorities, will continue during the planning period, with further reinforcement to support the transition of Flemish industry to a low-CO2 circular carbon industry. The current cluster policy supports 6 main clusters and 20 innovative business networks, which are focusing on the innovative solutions and technological breakthroughs needed to achieve the energy transition and which will contribute to a climate-proof society in Flanders. The pilot clusters include Flux50, Catalisti and Blauwe Cluster, while the innovative business networks include Power to Gas, Groen Licht, Offshore Energy and Smart Buildings in Use. The two Smart-Cities-Vlaanderen IoT4Society and IoT Valuechain IBNs are active in the area of smart cities. Flux50 facilitates cross-sectoral cooperation between the energy, ICT and building sectors with a view to developing innovative, multidisciplinary energy products and services in five innovation areas (energy ports, microgrids, multi-energy systems at district level, energy cloud applications and intelligent renovation). Catalisti, the spearhead cluster for chemicals and plastics, is aiming to boost the competitiveness of the chemical and plastic sectors through innovation, particularly innovation in terms of sustainable products and processes. The Blauwe Cluster is focusing on a strategy for a competitive and sustainable blue economy in Flanders. The Power to Gas IBN is focusing on building and exchanging knowledge, developing business models and conducting demonstration projects in the power-to-gas sector. The Groen Licht IBN is focusing on building and developing knowledge with a view to designing innovative products and services in the lighting sector. The Offshore Energy IBN is focusing on research and development with a view to developing and building a strong and innovative offshore energy value chain (offshore wind, wave and tidal energy) in Flanders. The Smart Buildings in Use IBN is focusing on digitising building management and maintenance. The two Smart-Cities-Vlaanderen IoT4Society 324 and IoT Valuechain IBNs firstly represent their target group of businesses in the Flemish ecosystem of smart cities and, secondly, aim to inspire Flemish businesses through various smart cities initiatives. The spearhead clusters have been allocated a specific annual project budget that they can use to subsidise innovation projects that fit with their objectives and roadmaps. The Flux50, Blauwe Cluster and Catalisti spearhead clusters are mainly or wholly using these budgets to achieve the objectives of the energy transition their project budget for this purpose. SIM, the Strategic Initiative Materials research centre in Flanders, which is focusing on material innovations to meet the current and future challenges facing society, is a vital promotional tool within the innovation landscape. It is developing knowledge and know-how with regard to material innovations that can be used by other clusters. Each spearhead cluster is allocated an annual budget of at least EUR 8 million. In 2018 subsidies of EUR 45.5 million were granted. Furthermore, an annual budget of around EUR 20 million is available for inter-cluster projects and transition priorities. Under their cluster pact and support agreement, the spearhead clusters produce an annual progress report in which they report on their projects and activities approved within and outside their allocated budget. The support agreement of each cluster identifies specific indicators at both cluster level (e.g. the total number of international cooperation and collaboration projects) and at activity level or for each innovation area (specific projects and/or activities in each area of action). As a result, the Flux50 spearhead cluster uses specific indicators for projects in the five innovation areas of energy ports, microgrids, multi-energy systems at district level, energy cloud applications and intelligent renovation.  Research and innovation in order to transition Flemish industry to a low-CO2 circular carbon industry by 2050 Framework for transitioning to a low-CO2 industry Industry has a key role to play in the energy and climate transition. In order to fully switch to a low-CO2 industry, a major industrial transition is needed over the coming decades, not just in Flanders but throughout the entire world. An important prerequisite in this respect is that the planned change cannot affect the competitiveness of Flemish energy-intensive industry, given that this would result in production capacity moving to other regions around the globe, where the energy and climate transition is less of a priority. Finding a fundamental solution to this unprecedented social, energy and climate challenge therefore requires ambitious, intensive and broadly supported efforts. It is clear that  due to their significant impact  the refining, chemical and steel sectors (in cooperation with the research world and public authorities) will play a key role in this context. New technologies and raw materials, and new products and production processes will be needed for this purpose. The year 2019 therefore saw the launch of the Flemish Moonshot programme, known as 2-neutraal/Flandre neutre en CO22-neutral Flanders). As the spearhead for innovation in Flemish energy and climate policy, its aim is to transition Flemish industry to a low-CO2 circular carbon industry by 2050. The innovative research carried out as part of this Moonshot is specifically intended to help develop cutting-edge technologies in Flanders by 2040 so that new and more efficient processes can be used to make new and unique low-CO2 products. These two aspects (processes and products) could in the future make a substantial contribution to the reduction in CO2 emissions in Flanders and around the world. This initiative is aiming to build knowledge in the longer term and will involve a budget of EUR 20 million per year. The Moonshot programme involves four fundamental and closely linked research pathways: (1) biology-based chemistry leading to unique and high-quality products; (2) carbon circularity in materials; (3) electrification and radical transformation of processes, and (4) energy innovation. These four research pathways are supported by, and can rely on, five enablers with regard to which cutting-edge expertise is available in Flanders, namely: (1) conversion technology; (2) separation technology; (3) predictive technology; (4) energy storage, and (5) energy transport. 325 In 2019 a multidisciplinary consortium (which was active for 10 months) began a contextualised analysis of the transition potential of Flemish industry, by identifying promising and pioneering pathways, opportunities for the Flemish research world in the context of this industrial transition, and other aspects, in order to support and guide the Flemish Moonshot.  More actively encouraging the demonstration of low-CO2 technologies Extension of the aid pathway within the usual instruments (demonstration, pilot project, test) Demonstration projects are a crucial step in the innovation chain and are vital for facilitating the roll-out of low-CO2 technologies in society. The aid pathway within the usual R&D instruments of the VLAIO has therefore already been extended to support demonstration and pilot projects. A crucial aspect in this regard is that the extension of the aid pathway (i.e. demonstration, pilot project, test) fits in sufficiently with the business reality and involves a sufficiently favourable regulatory framework allowing markets to develop based on these new applications. In accordance with the new government agreement 2019-2024, Flanders will continue to invest in supporting higher Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) by assisting pilot and demonstration plants.  ERDF/Interreg programme During the previous period 2014-2020, Flanders supported R&D in the area of energy and climate through the ERDF/Interreg programme (2014-2020), in particular priority axis   Supporting the transition to a low-axis Supporting sustainable urban development The ERDF/Interreg framework also supports demonstration projects in the area of energy and climate, including the required infrastructure. During the 2014-2020 programming period, the Energyville initiative and the Interreg Hydrogen Region 2.0 project were supported in particular. To improve efficiency and effectiveness, ERDF resources are used in Flanders in eight priority areas of the Flemish intelligent specialisation strategy, including the construction-environment-energy area. The ERDF Flanders programme for the next programming period 2021-2027 is currently being prepared. The draft regulation on the European Regional Development Fund and on the Cohesion Fund provides for the thematic concentration of support for Member States with a gross national income ratio equal to or above 100% of the EU average, which includes Belgium. Thematic clusters  A greener, low-carbon Europe by promoting clean and fair energy transition, green and blue investment, the circular economy, climate adaptation and risk -2020, the programme will be based around specific objectives. The ERDF managing authority will imminently start the process of developing and confirming the ERDF 2021-2027 programme with the interdepartmental working groups. The content will be confirmed during 2020. Resources will be allocated to the ERDF Flanders programme only once agreement has been reached at European level on the multiannual financial f-term budget.  Optimal use of the Innovation Fund of the Emissions Trading System The Innovation Fund of the Emissions Trading System, which will offer European aid for the demonstration of innovative low-CO2 technologies, will become one of the main sources of funding for innovative investments in the industrial and energy sectors. It is estimated that, over the period 2021-2030, EUR 10 billion from the auctioning of at least EUR 450 million allowances will be made available at EU level. 326 Flanders has an ambition to channel at least 2% of the fund towards Flemish energy-intensive industry and the innovative energy sector over the period 2021-2030. This represents EUR 200 million of European aid that could mobilise over EUR 300 million of innovative investment in Flanders over this period. The Department of the Environment and Spatial Planning (DOMG), the Flemish Energy Agency (VEA), the Flemish Agency for Innovation and Entrepreneurship (VLAIO) and the Department of the Economy, Science and Innovation (DEWI) are working together to actively inform Flemish stakeholders and potential project owners about the Innovation Fund of the Emissions Trading System. The opinions of Flemish stakeholders will also be taken into account when the terms of the fund are decided at European level. From 2020, businesses or business consortia with large-scale investment projects that could apply for aid from the Innovation Fund will be supported by the Flemish Government through cross-cutting project teams who will provide priority support and cooperation in the preparation of project proposals.  Speeding up the roll-out of innovative low-CO2 technologies in Flanders Economic investment aid: environmental incentive, strategic environmental aid, subsidy for investment in safe and environmentally friendly goods transport Ecologiepremie Plus  Through the Ecologiepremie+ environmental incentive, Flanders grants investment aid to businesses wanting to make environmental investments in the Flemish Region through advanced environmental technologies included in a restricted list of technologies. In this way, Flanders aims to encourage businesses to organise their production processes in an environmentally friendly and energy saving manner. The aid consists of funding for the additional investment costs involved in this type of investment. Under the Ecologiepremie+ measure, 361 aid applications were therefore approved in 2018, with the aid totalling EUR 19,281,572.53 and the investment totalling EUR 90,775,097.92.  Strategic environmental aid businesses to invest in environmental technologies that, due to being unique to the business in question, cannot be standardised and are not therefore included in the restricted list of technologies under the conventional Ecologiepremie+. This involves larger-scale investment projects that are specific to one business. In 2018, five aid applications were approved, with the aid totalling EUR 10,355,690 and the investment totalling EUR 178,123,075.  Subsidy for investment in safe and environmentally friendly goods transport by road businesses and the transport sector in particular to use safe and environmentally friendly lorries. In 2018, 1,865 aid applications were approved and paid from the 2018 budget, with the subsidy totalling EUR 20,968,351.10. In addition, 31 aid applications approved in 2017 were also paid from the 2018 budget (due to the 2017 budget having been exceeded), with the subsidy totalling EUR 404,939.69.   Investment aid for green heat Every year the Flemish Government launches a call for green heat, through which a subsidy is granted for investments in green heat, residual heat, district heating systems or biomethane injection. The costs taken into account are the additional investment costs of the installation compared with the investment costs of a reference installation, ignoring operating costs and benefits. During the next planning period 2021-2030, the focus will continue to be on district heating systems that facilitate the use of renewable heat or residual heat. 327  Assistance for cities, towns and municipalities in order to support the transition to smart and sustainable cities in Flanders Throughout Europe, cities, towns and municipalities are already working on smart and sustainable projects, often in cooperation with businesses and academic institutions. In ocities, towns and municipalities, such projects must be effectively implemented on a large scale. Various initiatives have been launched for this purpose, which will continue during the 2021-2030 planning period. In 2019 a fact-finding mission began with the aim of assessing the Flemish landscape and creating and promoting a Smart City ecosystem. Lastly, in the context of Smart Cities, three innovative business networks are currently active.  Funding of the Société de participation pour la Flandre The Société de participation pour la Flandre (PMV) supports Flemish businesses through guarantees, subordinated loans and capital investments. A budget of EUR 20 million has been reserved for capital investments in energy efficiency, with stakes ranging up to 50%. PMV is therefore supporting the Flemish economy to achieve the Flemish, Belgian and European energy and climate objectives.  Conclusion of Green Deals Green Deals are already being successfully used as an innovative way of establishing voluntary cooperation between businesses, civil society and public authorities. During the planning period, we aim to entrench and expand their use in order to bring about energy and climate innovation. We will therefore make targeted use of support instruments in the policy area of the economy to help complete deals. In this way, we will help Flemish businesses to achieve their ambitions and strategies for the future and become innovative pioneers.  Low-regulation framework to encourage innovation With the Green Innovation Space) project, we aim to encourage the economy to become greener by using a low-regulation framework to temporarily restrict regulations that hinder innovation, which will therefore promote innovation. This project aims to go beyond the conventional thematic testing ground and offer opportunities to conduct pilot tests in a real-life housing situation. It is targeted at both businesses and knowledge institutions, and all forms of innovation are permitted provided that they help to green the economy, including energy and climate innovations.  On 5 April 2019 the Flemish Government approved the amendment to the Energy Decree that concerns the approval of low-regulation energy zones.  Dissemination of knowledge and provision of accessible services to raise business awareness of the energy and climate transition  The dissemination of existing technology and knowledge is clearly crucial to encourage their use. The VLAIO and its partners therefore provide accessible services (awareness-raising, education, information, advice and networking) to reach the largest possible group of businesses and galvanise them into action with a view to achieving the objectives of the energy and climate policy. Higher education establishments already play an important role in enabling businesses to discover existing technologies; this role will be further developed so that knowledge arising from environmental and other education can be passed on to businesses. Other initiatives to disseminate knowledge from higher education establishments may also be adopted. 328 Enterprise contracts offer resources to a series of structural partners so that they can provide accessible information, advice and assistance, in addition to the traditional assistance provided with business start-up and growth. As part of the energy transition, climate policy, circular economy and industry 4.0, these partners agree to make businesses aware of the challenges that they face and how they can be incorporated in their business operations. Some of these partners already have useful measures in place in this context, for example the Voka sustainable business charters in cooperation with the economic development agencies of the provinces.  Support for the transition to products with lower net carbon emissions Products with lower net carbon emissions face various obstacles in their production and marketing: - cheaper identical products with higher net carbon emissions (e.g. grey hydrogen, ethanol, plastic); - regulations and standards that do not take account of new technologies, meaning that new products are non-compliant (e.g. use of CO2 in construction materials); - European or local regulations that hinder innovation (e.g. CCU and waste in the EU ETS). Over the planning period and in cooperation with businesses, these barriers will be identified along with possible solutions and the systems that can be used to facilitate the marketing of such products.  Flemish opportunities with regard to CCU/CCS and hydrogen The presence in Flanders of the largest integrated petrochemical cluster in Europe means that significant CO2 emissions are concentrated in a relatively small area. Flanders is therefore an ideal region for developing new cooperation and integrating innovative systems allowing tens of millions of tonnes of CO2 to be offset, collected or sequestered, or transformed into useful products. We will study the possibility of new infrastructure for this purpose, which could be used by both ETS and non-ETS businesses. Our excellent logistical situation in terms of ports and pipelines offers opportunities to develop hydrogen as a low-carbon energy carrier. This could be widely used, both directly and to recycle CO2 into useful molecules (e.g. power-to-methanol). In addition to continued support for the Moonshot programme (CO2-neutral Flanders), Flanders undertakes to support CCS networks and CCU installations. It also harbours the ambition to become a European leader in Hydrogen technology. In addition to using Flemish research and innovation channels and the ERDF-Interreg framework, Flanders also intends to maximise European opportunities and resources (such as the Innovation Fund of the Emissions Trading System). In this context, Flanders also intends to adopt a strategic approach to Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEIs). The IPCEI framework identifies strategic value chains in Europe and for Europe, in which major investments must be made by Member States and regions- Furthermore, Flanders intends to support large-scale investment projects of businesses with cross-cutting project teams, which will benefit from priority support and cooperation from the entire Flemish Government.  Establishment of a Flemish carbon market for negative emissions, particularly within the LULUCF framework This measure is described in the LULUCF chapter, but is mentioned here as well because it needs to be further studied.  Monitoring and encouraging the competitiveness of the Flemish economy in the context of the energy and climate transition We will monitor the impact of energy and climate regulations on the competitiveness of the Flemish economy, particularly Flemish energy-intensive industry. 329 Flanders also intends to use the cluster policy to increase the competitiveness of Flemish businesses in the global low-carbon value chains, and the trilateral strategy for the chemical industry to maintain and reinforce a competitive chemical industry in the transition to a sustainable world economy. Lastly, it will monitor the competitive strengths of the Flemish technology sector in the European and international sustainable and low-carbon value chains through and in cooperation with the spearhead clusters and sectoral federations.  Energy Standard Through a 2018 decree, Flanders introduced the principle Energy S, which is a concept that is also being developed at federal level. This standard will assess the competitive obstacles in terms of energy prices and their components, and must ensure that the various components of energy prices in Belgium, and therefore also in Flanders, are no higher than those in neighbouring countries. The standard is intended to help monitor the competitiveness of businesses, particularly energy-intensive businesses. Effects on other consumers will also be monitored.  Cluster policy The Flemish cluster policy is an important lever for reinforcing the position of Flemish businesses on the regional and international markets, by releasing unexploited economic potential and by increasing the competitiveness of Flemish businesses through active and sustainable cooperation between operators. Increasing competitiveness is defined as ensuring a stronger position on the regional and international markets for Flemish businesses. Clusters that offer direct economic added value for Flemish businesses can also help to overcome societal challenges, such as the energy and climate transition. There are two types of cluster: a limited number of spearhead clusters in strategic areas for Flanders (which form the centre of gravity of the cluster policy), and a series of innovative business networks (which are more limited cluster initiatives with promising potential, where a model for active cooperation between businesses is vital in order to become more competitive). In the context of the energy and climate transition, the spearhead clusters include Flux50, Catalisti and Blauwe Cluster, while the innovative business networks (IBNs) include Power to Gas, Groen Licht, Offshore Energy, Smart Buildings in Use and the two IBNs active in the area of smart cities. Depending on the cluster, competitiveness can be increased through a combination of different strategies (creation of access to new markets, accelerated marketing of solutions and/or new knowledge, development of worker skills, creation of new value chains, etc.), which must ultimately result in a sustainable increase in competitiveness and in sustainable economic added value for Flanders (e.g. through investment, job creation, increased exports, higher turnover, cost reduction, etc.). Under their cluster pact and support agreement, the spearhead clusters produce an annual progress report in which they report on their projects and activities approved within and outside their allocated budget. The competitiveness aspect of .  Trilateral chemical cooperation between Flanders, the Netherlands and North Rhine-Westphalia The European chemical industry, particularly the chemical industry in the trilateral region, is facing a number of major challenges in a global market that is rapidly changing and increasingly competitive. The three regions of Flanders, the Netherlands and North Rhine-Westphalia have joined forces to develop a common vision and Striving to become the transition towards a sustainable and competitive chemical industry clusterpartnership between industry, universities and authorities. The strategy identifies 21 measures in three vertical policy fields (Research & Innovation; Energy & Feedstocks; Trilateral Chemical Infrastructure) and one horizontal policy field (Policy Coordination). 330 https://www.ewi-vlaanderen.be/sites/default/files/bestanden/trilateral_strategy_chemical_industry.pdf  Promoting the export of Flemish greening technology Following the new government agreement, Flanders will also focus on exporting Flemish greening technology, which will help to build a sustainable economy in Flanders and reduce global CO2 emissions. In this context and in collaboration with the relevant sectors, Flanders Investment & Trade (FIT) will develop a strategy for exporting technological solutions that can help to tackle the climate challenge. Cooperation between the VLAIO and the FIT will also be reinforced through a protocol.  Walloon Region Our development model and the type of society that we want for future generations must dictate our current strategic choices. For that reason, five priority themes have been defined at European level in order to focus our investment in research, namely sustainable development, renewable energy, technology research, ageing and quality of life, and health. These strategic themes respond to clearly identified societal challenges and correspond to emerging economic areas with significant innovation potential. The competitiveness clusters developed since 2005 in Wallonia have brought together labour forces to work on these themes: BIOWIN (for life sciences), SKYWIN (for aeronautics and space), WAGRALIM (for the agro-industries), LOGISTICS EN WALLONIE (for logistics), MECATECH (for mechanical engineering) and GREENWIN (for environmental technologies). They rely not only on the existing Walloon industrial fabric, but also on expertise and knowledge in terms of technology, research and innovation in order to ensure the economic redeployment of Wallonia by creating new activities responding to the challenges facing society. These competitiveness clusters are based on a partnership between universities, research centres and businesses of all sizes. Concentrating research efforts is also helping to internationalise Walloon stakeholders through their participation in joint research programmes (Horizon 2020, ERA-NET, EUREKA, etc.) or research infrastructures (ESFRI). In particular, thematic clusters have also been established in the area of renewable energy and energy efficiency, which have brought together researchers so that energy research projects can be developed. These are the - for sustainable construction and eco-construction of buildings. Furthermore, the GREENWIN competitiveness cluster aims to develop innovation in green chemistry and sustainable materials (including their applications in zero-energy or nearly zero-energy buildings). Wallonia is supporting the industrial use of innovation results by participating in the Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEIs) on batteries and hydrogen. The IPCEIs enable Member States to support this industrial use beyond the limits imposed on State aid. Furthermore, the Walloon research and innovation budget is mainly managed by the Walloon Public Service for the Economy, Jobs and Research. Every year, a survey of projects is carried out in order to report to the International Energy Agency; a specific methodology and allocation key are used for complex projects or those indirectly linked to energy. In the most recent report from 2017, the budgets for energy research were allocated as follows:  Wallonia    GDP 2015    Walloon public budget for research  average 2012-2018    Walloon private budget for research     Walloon public/private budget for research   2.44% of GDP 331 Walloon public budget for energy research  average 2012-2017  13.85% of the Walloon public budget for research budget received from Europe (Structural Funds) for energy research average 2012-2017    budget received from Europe (Horizon 2020) for energy research average 2014-2019    Walloon private budget for energy research     Walloon-Europe public/private budget for energy research   0.26% of GDP Walloon public budget for climate and environment research  average 2012-2017 not available   budget received from Europe (Structural Funds) for climate and environment research average 2012-2017 not available   budget received from Europe (Horizon 2020) for climate and environment research average 2014-2019    Walloon private budget for climate and environment research  not available    It should also be noted that, within the budget of EUR 110 million: - in addition to the energy budget, a budget is allocated for climate and environment research (a small part of the budget may therefore also depend on DG03, for example); - it is planned to further access European funds to 2030 in order to minimise the impact on the Walloon budget. Furthermore, according to the Regional Policy Statement, invested in support for innovation, achieve the European target of 3% of GDP invested in research and development, and increase this European target to 4% by 2035 and 5% by 2050, with one-third coming from   ii. Where applicable, cooperation with other Member States in this area, including, where appropriate, information on how the SET-Plan objectives and policies are being translated to a national context Flemish Region See point 3.5(i).  Walloon Region (a) Description of how SET Plan targets were taken into account when setting national objectives and identifying national energy R&I strategy Energy research is carried out through calls for proposals or through assistance from information points, with the themes coinciding with the SET Plan priorities and the capacity of the Walloon scientific and industrial community (see intelligent specialisation strategy). The work carried out in the context of the SET Plan to define the key actions, implementation plans and R&I roadmaps is used to guide the Walloon R&I priorities, taking into account the technological skills of our industry and the scientific skills of our research community. 332 The Walloon intelligent specialisation strategy is currently being revised. A study has been carried out to cross-reference the Walloon strengths with the European research priorities. The competitiveness clusters have been involved in this work, with businesses having been consulted and now being involved in implementing the priorities. The following energy, climate and mobility priorities have been identified:  smart/integrated communities, including positive energy districts;  integration of storage systems;  energy efficiency of buildings;  new fuels (including electricity) and sustainable vehicles;  CO2 management and reuse in production processes;  climate projections, predictions and models, and new associated services;  traffic and system management;  rail technologies. These priorities will be implemented to support the NECP, in synergy with the corresponding implementation plans of the SET Plan priorities. Under the branch agreements (see point - are required to reduce their energy consumption and CO2 2 management and reuse in production  to invest in research and innovation in this respect.  efficiency solutions for buildingsto support -point 3.2.2).  energy districts, self-sufficient flexibility of energy systems, consumption/production management (buildings, mobility, public services and spaces, highways, etc.) and energy storage. This priority will be implemented in synergy with Action    It will support point 3.2.5 Change behaviour to reduce  -, point point l flexibility of the energy system to particularly  the internal energy market. The strategic   will support point  ii in synergy with Action  and synthetic gases mentioned in the Walloon Regional Policy Statement of September 2019 will be a key focus. The Walloon Region already participates, on a case-by-case basis, in the ERA-NETs resulting from the SET Plan  of the future Horizon Europe programme. The Walloon Region encourages participation, through the NCPs, in the calls of the Horizon 2020 and Horizon Europe programmes. Horizon 2020 calls particularly cover the themes proposed by the European Battery Alliance. The recommendations of the Clean Energy Industrial Forum on Renewables will be taken on board. 333 The Walloon Region participates in the Technology Collaboration Programmes of the International Energy Agency. The most relevant research projects in this respect, subsidised through the above programmes, therefore form part of the IEA programmes, in particular -integrated PV), Hydrogen and Bioenergy. Wallonia participates in the Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme (ETSAPto analyse and compile energy scenarios and as a decision aid. It may in particular be used to develop action plans following on from the NECP. Belgium participates in other Technology Collaboration Programmes of the IEA; the Walloon Region has access to these, but does not directly participate in them. Except for bioenergy, research into the generation of energy from renewable sources is the poor relative of the research, innovation and competitiveness policies and measures. It is not among the priorities of the intelligent specialisation strategy that is currently being revised. However, in a bottom-up approach, at the request of the industrial sector, Wallonia may take part in the  (b) Description of concrete partnerships that are a result of SET Plan work The Walloon Region participates in the work of the SET Plan implementation working groups according to its priorities listed in the above point. It has participated in the ERA-NET the -ERA.NET Cofund and RegSYS programmes (on integrated regional smart energy systems). It will take part in the ERA-NET Smart Energy Systems programme: Integrated Storage and Digitalisation of Energy Systems. It has also taken part in the Urban Europe calls, in the ERA-NET New European Wind Atlas and in the Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Technology Initiative. programme. (c) Benchmarks for volumes of cooperation with SET Plan countries On average, a figure of around EUR 500,000 is committed in the Walloon budgets for each call. The annual amount actually spent is lower and depends on the level of participation and selection of Walloon operators. (d) Other areas/schemes/instruments for international cooperation participation in the Horizon Europe Framework Research and Innovation Programme, working groups have been set up, involving the authorities and research operators. Each group is dedicated to a cluster of Pillar authorities on consultations for the Horizon Europe programme. The aim of this group is to improve the participation of Walloon research operators in the European framework research programmes so that they are better integrated within the European dynamic and can improve their expertise and competitiveness, create synergies and gain access to wider markets. Walloon participation in the NER 300 calls has not been a resounding success. Wallonia will promote the participation of businesses in the Innovation Fund of the Emissions Trading System, starting with the first call in 2020.  334 iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds Federal State Adequate levels of funding must be provided. From 2020, 5% to 10% of the R&D budget will be earmarked for climate and energy projects. Several innovation funds focusing on the energy transition already exist, but more is needed. The energy transition will be included as a priority in support programmes for research, innovation and pilot projects. The following measures could encourage innovation:  fiscal support for the recruitment of researchers;  support for pilot projects;  promotion and support of innovative technologies;  circular economy support campaigns;  social innovation support projects designed to change behaviour;  conduct of a SWOT analysis and regular update of the SET Plan to focus on those areas in which Belgium offers added value.  Innovation Objectives Support and encourage research and development aimed at bringing about the energy transition, particularly in those areas with the greatest impact on the climate, specifically renewable energy, management and adaptation of energy systems, sustainable mobility, agricultural production, the circular economy, and all sectors working directly to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In addition to developing and disseminating new technologies, jobs connected with the energy transition must be protected and sustainably developed, and the versatility needed in terms of training profiles must be ensured. From 2020, 5% to 10% of the R&D budget will be earmarked for climate and energy projects, and will also focus on social innovation. Belgium must ensure that nuclear fission used to generate electricity in the country is phased out in a safe, sustainable and responsible manner so that future generations are not left with a heavy burden.  Key actions  National Pact for Strategic Investments (PNIS): o The National Pact for Strategic Investments aims to provide an assessment of strategic investment needs to 2030 in six areas, including energy and mobility. o Around EUR 150  as a lever to mobilise close to EUR 2 billion in infrastructure investment. o Through the PNIS, experts from the federated/federal entities will carry out coordination and structural work on budgetary and financial tools, financing techniques, EU, federal and federated sources of funding, including debt agencies and National Promotional Banks (NPBs), and financial market instruments.  Energy Transition Fund: o This fund was set up in 2016 to finance innovative energy transition projects. o The fee paid in order to continue operating the Doel 1 and 2 nuclear power plants (a fixed amount of EUR 20 million per year to 2025) will fund the Energy Transition Fund created by the Law of 28 June 2015. 335 This fee is payable under Article 4(2) of the Law of 31 January 2003 on the gradual phase-out of nuclear power for industrial electricity generation purposes (inserted by the Law of 28 June 2015 amending the Law of 31 January 2003 on the gradual phase-out of nuclear power for industrial electricity generation purposes in order to guarantee security of energy supply). o This fund aims to finance measures designed to support and encourage research and development in innovative energy projects falling under the responsibility of the Federal State, and in particular:  measures to maintain and/or develop and/or research a system capable of guaranteeing security of supply and network balance, particularly as regards energy production and storage, and also demand-side management;  renewable energy in the Belgian Exclusive Economic Zone of the North Sea;  biofuels;  nuclear power. o The purpose of the Energy Transition Fund is described as follows in the parliamentary proceedings on the Law of 28 will encourage research and development in innovative energy projects and, in particular,  (http://www.dekamer.be/FLWB/PDF/54/1046/54K1046001.pdf) o Every year the Directorate-General for Energy organises a call for proposals in accordance with Article 3(1) of the Royal Decree of 9 May 2017 laying down the conditions for using the Energy Transition Fund. The first call was launched on 30 June 2017, the second in December 2017, the third on 20 August 2018 and the most recent one in October 2019. The first three calls combined led to subsidies of EUR 57 million being granted to 35 projects. o The budget of the Energy Transition Fund for 2019 is EUR 25 million, which may be granted as subsidies in 2019 to projects that meet all the relevant criteria and that involve:  research and development;  investment in research infrastructure or innovation clusters; or  innovation by SMEs. o This call is open to:  Belgian legal persons;  legal persons from other EU Member States. o Every year, on a proposal from the Energy Minister, the government decides in advance how the Energy Transition Fund budget may be allocated to specific federal energy responsibilities. Where applicable, this decision is formalised in the next call for proposals.  Nuclear research: o Since the global economic crisis in 2008, public funding of nuclear R&D has increased from under EUR 60 million in 2010 to over EUR 100 million in 2018. Almost one third of this sum has been allocated to other subjects, with one fifth being allocated to the management of nuclear waste infrastructure, as  6 million have been allocated to nuclear fusion. o Despite the law on the gradual phase-out of industrial electricity generation through nuclear fission, Belgium will continue its nuclear R&D and innovation activities and will maintain or develop a high level of expertise. Nuclear know-how will remain a priority for Belgium in the 336 coming decades. Through the MYRRHA project, Belgium will continue the international research needed into innovative solutions for highly radioactive waste and the qualification of materials for fusion reactors. Support for skills must also ensure the continued production of radioisotopes in Belgium. o MYRRHA will be a nuclear research infrastructure of pan-European importance. The Belgian Government has financially supported the project since 2010. Additional funding of EUR 558 million for the period 2019-2038, granted by the Belgian Government on 7 September 2018, will be used to complete the first phase of MYRRHA: construction at the te of the first part of its particle accelerator and its irradiation stations, which will be commissioned in 2026. The Council of Ministers has also approved the formation of the MYRRHA international non-profit association so that foreign partners can become involved. This type of legal status is ideal for large projects funded by several foreign countries, which will help to finance the next stages of the MYRRHA project. This decision will encourage foreign partners interested in the MYRRHA project and its applications to become involved. o Belgium will also continue to work on developing nuclear fusion energy in collaboration with roadmap to the realisation of fusion en  Other measures It should be noted that the above list is not exhaustive and only gives an idea of the wide range of innovations that could play an important role in a successful energy transition.  Competitiveness Objectives Ensure that the various components of the energy cost in Belgium are no higher than those in neighbouring countries, so that the competitiveness of Belgian (energy-intensive) businesses and the purchasing power of families are maintained. In this respect, the analysis of the position of Belgian businesses on the global market will also be taken into account.  Key actions  Energy Standard, designed to maintain the competitiveness of businesses and the purchasing power of families. This standard will depend on the pattern of use and energy intensity. o In order to protect the competitiveness of Belgian industry in relation to neighbouring countries, and also to preserve jobs, an Energy Standard aimed at businesses, particularly energy-intensive businesses, will be introduced. o An annual study will be jointly commissioned by the four regulators. A joint study has been requested from the federal and regional regulators (FORBEG). Each entity will assume its responsibilities and will adopt a standard in its area of responsibility. The four entities in the country must work closely together to ensure that their systems are not contradictory or in competition. The study will be used as reference to monitor how electricity prices develop in the various sectors. The first study will be available in 2020. The various entities will use the study results to develop the Energy Standard, which will help to create a level playing field with neighbouring countries. o A specific and measurable competitiveness objective will be developed, not just for the energy-intensive industries, but also for the low-carbon technology sector. In this respect, their 337 position on the global market will be specifically analysed, with competitiveness strengths and challenges being identified. Measurable objectives must be defined for the future on that basis, together with the policy and measures needed to achieve those objectives. The necessary links with business and industrial policy must therefore be made. o Work will continue to remove barriers to the roll-out and marketing of low-carbon products. o Economic support policy instruments will be calibrated so that they form a springboard for positive business cases with innovative solutions. o A study will be started in 2020, and completed by mid-2022 at the latest, in close collaboration with the Regions, the Federal Planning Bureau and other relevant authorities. The aim of the study will be to comprehensively review the competitiveness of not just energy-intensive businesses, but also the low-carbon technology sector. It will also specifically analyse their position on the global market, by highlighting competitive advantages and potential challenges and by identifying measurable objectives to be achieved in the future and policy and measures needed to achieve those objectives, in conjunction with industrial policy. This study should be useful for updating the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan.  Other measures  Encourage the active involvement of consumers.  Belgium will call on Europe to assess and monitor environmental, social and economic inequalities between the European Union and its trade partners, in conjunction with industrial policy and energy and climate policy.  Energy and climate research projects supported by federal research policy: Project Budget (estimate) Timetable ESA-PROBA-V exploitation EUR 43.4 million EUR 31 million already spent EUR 12.4 million (2019- ESA-ALTIUS development + exploitation EUR 152 million Launch at end of 2023 or 2024 Exploitation from 2024-2027? JPI Climate - SOLSTICE EUR 500,000 2020 EUMETSAT EUR 12 million 2019/yearly based JPI Climate - ERA-NET AXIS EUR 348,000 from Research Programme BRAIN-BE2.0 + EUR 63,000 EU top-up  2019 JPI Climate & JPI Oceans - New climate science on oceans EUR 500,000 2020 BiodivERsA BiodivClim EUR 500,000 2020 IPCC Trust Fund EUR 74,000 2019/yearly based Bilateral cooperation with Vietnam EUR 250,000 2019 ESFRI-RI ICOS EUR 84,000 - membership fee 2019/yearly based Supporting projects - ICOS IASB: EUR 83,000 - ICOS Belgica: EUR 80,000 2019 Procedure supporting the valorisation of federal components to ESFRI RIs 2020 onwards EUR 500,000/4 years per selected component ESFRI-RI ACTRIS EUR 1.2 million for a project in support of the upgrade of the federal 2018-2022 338 infrastructure (IASB-BIRA & IRM-KMI) participating in ACTRIS Procedure supporting the valorisation of federal components to ESFRI RIs 2020 onwards EUR 500,000/4 years per selected component MYRRHA EUR 287 million for construction of Phase 1 2019-2026 EUR 114.9 million for R&D in support of Phases 2 and 3 2019-2026 EUR 156.7 million for operation of Phase 1 (in case Phases 2 and 3 are delayed or not started) 2027-2038 JPI Climate - ERA4CS ERA-NET Cofund EUR 417,000 from Research Programme BRAIN-BE + EUR 73,000 EU top-up 2017-2020 BRAIN-BE2.0 TBD with a maximum of EUR 29.4 million 2019-2023 Antarctica campaigns BRAIN-BE2.0 Unknown. Depending on the call themes and selected projects 2018-2023 Belgian Climate Knowledge Center TBD around EUR 700,000/year 2020/multi-annual (if extra budget available) Total    Flemish Region See point 3.5(i).  Walloon Region The general support measures for research cover energy research: tax incentives for research and development, including tax credits, and Horizon 2020 incentives helping SMEs to prepare, submit and negotiate collaborative research and innovation projects. Particular effort will be made to promote, encourage and support the involvement of Walloon researchers in European framework research programmes, through the Horizon Europe working group referred to above. The National Contact Point will clearly be involved in this effort and have an important role to play. Lastly, use of the Innovation Fund by businesses will be encouraged. As regards the regional budget, every year a specific budget of EUR 7,000,000 will be earmarked for a research programme on an emerging theme in the future intelligent specialisation strategy.  Brussels Capital Region The energy and climate transition clearly requires innovation and experimentation. As underlined by the Regional Policy Statement of the Brussels Government, research, development and innovation are not only important factors in economic growth, but also levers for improving public well-being. The Region must therefore increase its investment in research, development and innovation. In this respect, the Region will actively contribute to the national target of 3% of GDP (including one third public) spent on research and development (143). The Energy Pact also contains research and innovation objectives. From 2020, 5% to 10% of public R&D expenditure should be earmarked for the decarbonisation of the economy, including: - tax support for the recruitment of researchers;                                                            143  339 - support for pilot projects; - support for and promotion of innovative technologies; - campaigns supporting the circular economy. As buildings are the prime emitters of greenhouse gases in the Brussels Capital Region, the strategy to reduce the environmental impact of existing buildings by 2030-2050 sets out a measure specifically addressing innovation in renovation: RenoLab. In order to help the construction sector to understand that a sustainable renovation incorporating circular economy principles is feasible, in the first instance specific projects need to be supported and observed. For that purpose, a laboratory for the su This will carry out:  - calls for projects to test and develop existing tools in the renovation strategy and training in these tools (e.g. roadmap, circular design tool, sustainability assessment tool, etc.);  - calls for renovation projects on certain specific themes (materials, acoustics, circularity, etc.) or on the sustainability levels of renovation projects (e.g. small-scale renovations by individuals) in order to observe, analyse and disseminate new, unknown and innovative practices;  - actions aimed at specific target audiences, such as actions to increase the renovation of small jointly owned properties.  This RenoLab will consist of a (continuous) management structure led by Bruxelles Environnement, which will establish the appropriate links between the various operators and actions, while highlighting innovative practices in the renovation sector. The various renovation operators will be brought within a network (like the Kennisplatform Renovatie in the Flemish Region) in order to share their experiences (best practices, innovations) in terms of working methods, models or implementation methods.  Numerous European programmes (ERDF and Interreg, Horizon 2020, LIFE, etc.) also exist and can be used to fund European projects in areas of interest to Brussels, particularly innovation in sustainable renovation. The Region therefore undertakes to look for further European funds and calls for projects that may be useful, and to provide the means and resources needed in this respect. Through its intelligent specialisation strategy, development, as identified by the Regional Innovation Plan for the period 2016-2020 (144), adopted in July 2016. This plan aims to regularly assess the return on investments in research and innovation. In this context, three strategic areas of activity have been identified because they offer significant innovation potential: - environment  green economy; - information technologies (IT)  digital economy; - health. With regard to the environment, the Regional Innovation Plan targets the Smart Cities and circular economy strategies. As a result, energy efficiency, sustainable chemistry, the circular economy and mobility have been identified as key factors in innovation. The approach proposed in the Regional Innovation Plan is to optimise the impact of R&I in Brussels by reinforcing cooperation in this area between regional public organisations and by creating a collaboration dynamic with the Federal Government, federated entities and the European Union. New instruments are proposed in the Regional Innovation Plan in order to increase support for businesses and research organisations (including measures to raise awareness of innovation support schemes), reinforce clusters, exploit new forms of innovation (such as social innovation) and utilise know-how in Brussels.                                                            144 See http://www.innoviris.be/fr/politique-rdi/plan-regional-dinnovation  340 Updating the Regional Innovation Plan will offer an opportunity to anchor the energy and climate transition at  Furthermore, transition also clearly requires experimentation. A series of technologies and also configurations, combinations and practices should be studied. However, some legal and administrative provisions form a brake on this type of experimentation. For that reason, the Region should create a framework for experimentation. Clearly this is not about blurring standards, but about constructing a framework for well-defined experimentation in a given project, over a limited period of time, resulting in an assessment and presentation of the results and lessons learned during the experimentation. In this context, the government will take the following action: - Continue with and reinforce the Regional Innovation Plan, while linking it with the energy and climate transition dynamic in the urban area. In preparing this plan, strategic research areas will be clarified and, where applicable, supplemented, and social and behavioural innovations will be combined with technological innovations. - Develop a regulatory framework for experimentation. This will involve, within a defined and controlled framework (to be developed), temporarily suspending certain barriers (tariffs, taxes, obligations, etc.) in order to test and document the relevance and performance of pilot decarbonisation and energy efficiency projects, while ensuring that this regulatory framework complies with the State aid legislation. - The government will reinforce the interactions between the various support tools for research, development and innovation so that all stages of development of an innovative service or product are covered. To that end, it will strengthen collaboration between public players so that businesses are better supported at all stages of their development. More generally, it will strengthen collaboration between the business world and the academic research world. The government will also increase its support for innovation by associations. Cooperation with the federal level Bearing in mind the division of responsibilities and in addition to its own efforts, the Brussels Capital Region also wants to develop the cooperation with the federal level within the framework of the Energy Pact. In this context, the Brussels Government will call on the Federal Government to: - reform business taxation, in particular by introducing a tax incentive for researchers and research and innovation in relation to the energy and climate transition, including for pilot projects and work that should lead to changes in public behaviour and business practices; - establish a regulatory framework favourable to experimentation as, for the pilot projects referred to above, the temporary suspension of barriers also potentially applies to federal legislation. Within a specific and controlled framework, it should be possible to better understand the conditions of the energy and climate transition through experimentation. The Brussels Capital Region will therefore encourage the Federal Government to allow this type of experimentation in its regulations. 