3.3 Energy security dimension i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.3  priority axes: diversification of the sources and routes for natural gas supply, efficient use of indigenous energy resources and improvement of interconnections in the energy system, and enhancing the flexibility of the national energy system, energy storage solutions and information security.  Diversification of the sources and routes for supply of natural gas through implementation of the following projects:  The gas interconnector Greece-Bulgaria (IGB)  The interconnector has a total length of 182 km and capacity for the transportation of 3 up to 5 billion m3 of natural gas per year. Given sufficient interest, the capacity can be increased up to 10 billion m3 per year. The interconnector will be built between Komotini, Greece, and Stara Zagora, Bulgaria. It will connect the transmission grids of DESFA and   142  TAP in Komotini, Greece, and the transmission system of Bulgartransgas EAD in Stara Zagora. The project for the construction of an interconnector between Greece and Bulgaria has been included in the PCI list of the European Union with accordance with Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure. It is one of seven priority gas projects implemented within the framework of the Central and South East Europe Energy Connectivity (CESEC) initiative. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2020.  The direct effects of project implementation include real diversification of the sources of natural gas supply to Bulgaria, creating an opportunity for the supply of natural gas via the Southern Gas Corridor and from LNG sources, and connecting and transforming Bulgaria and its gas transmission system into a major part of the infrastructure for gas supply from alternative sources for the entire region of Central and Southeast Europe.  The project will ensure that Bulgaria is able to import the contracted quantity of 1 billion m3 of natural gas per year after the launch of the Shah Deniz 2 gas field in Azerbaijan. The interconnector will also provide a possibility for gas supply via the LNG terminal in Alexandroupoli from producers like the United States, Qatar, Algeria, Nigeria, etc., including Israel and Egypt in the future.   Construction of a gas interconnector between Bulgaria and Serbia (IBS)  The planned reversible gas interconnector between Bulgaria and Serbia (IBS) will connect the national gas transmission networks of the two countries. With a total length of 170 km, it will run from Novi Iskar in Bulgaria to Nis in Serbia along a route that comprises a 62.2 km section in Bulgaria. The gas interconnector will be reversible, allowing two-way gas transmission of: 1 billion m3 per annum up to 1.8 billion m3 per annum from Bulgaria to Serbia and 0.15 billion m3 per annum from Serbia to Bulgaria. The project is expected to be completed in mid-2022. The construction of the interconnector between Bulgaria and Serbia is a project of common interest for the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure and a project of common interest for the Energy Community. It is also an element of the infrastructure necessary for the implementation of the Balkan Gas Hub project. It is one of seven priority gas projects implemented within the framework of the Central and South East Europe Energy Connectivity (CESEC) initiative. The implementation of the project will ensure the diversification of routes via an interconnector, enabling the transmission of natural gas to Serbia from the new entry in the Bulgarian gas transmission network. At the same time, it will allow the importation of natural gas from Serbia in crisis situations.   Project for the construction of an LNG terminal in Alexandroupoli   143  The terminal has a rated annual capacity of 6.1 billion m³ and a storage capacity of 170 000 m³. It is a modern technological project involving the construction of an offshore floating unit for the reception, storage and re-gasification of LNG and a system comprising a subsea and an onshore gas transmission pipeline through which the natural gas will be shipped into the Greek national natural gas system and onwards to final consumers. The LNG terminal is strategically situated in proximity to the gas transmission network of the Greek national gas operator DESFA S.A. The European Commission has included the project in the list of projects of common interest in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure, including in the third and fourth lists of the European Commission. Bulgaria has been a strong advocate for the inclusion of the LNG terminal in the PCI list. The terminal is expected to start commercial operations in 2022. The rated annual capacity and LNG storage capacity of the terminal will enable Greece but also Bulgaria, Romania, North Macedonia, Serbia and Hungary to balance needs on their respective domestic markets. Bulgaria considers the Alexandroupoli terminal project as complementing the gas interconnector with Greece and the Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP). It will give it access to producers and suppliers of liquefied gas from the United States, Qatar and Algeria as well as Israel and Egypt, among other countries, in the future.  Bulgartransgas EAD will acquire a 20 % share in the LNG terminal construction project and Bulgargas EAD will participate in the legally binding stage by booking transmission gas terminal near Alexandroupoli is of key importance for the country and the entire region of Southeast Europe. The synergy between the LNG terminal and the construction of the interconnector between Greece and Bulgaria will contribute to the security and diversification of energy supply.  The Balkan Gas Hub The concept developed with assistance from the European Commission envisages the construction of a gas distribution centre (gas hub) in Bulgaria, including the necessary transmission infrastructure, and a natural gas exchange. The gas hub will connect the natural gas markets of all Member States in the region  Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Hungary, Croatia and Slovenia, linking the region to Central and Western Europe, and to Serbia, North Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which are members of the Energy Community. The concept for the construction of a gas distribution centre for South East Europe in Bulgaria is based on the idea of creating a gas trading platform by building infrastructure that will enable the supply of significant quantities of natural gas from different sources intended for further transportation via several physical entry points. The Balkan gas hub has been included in the PCI list of the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) 347/2013 as a group of projects that contribute to the   144  development and enhancement of gas infrastructure. The projects for the interconnectors between Bulgaria and Greece and Serbia, respectively, and for the upgrade and rehabilitation of the gas transmission network of Bulgartransgas EAD have also been included in this group. In the context of the European objectives for developing an interconnected and single European gas market, the implementation of the gas hub concept fits in with the projects for the development of the Southern Gas Corridor and in line with the plans for gas infrastructure development in Europe. The Balkan gas hub would be able to rely on natural gas supplied via the newly constructed submarine pipeline in strict compliance with the requirements for the Third Liberalisation Package of the EU and along the existing route; natural gas extracted from the Bulgarian and Romanian sections of the Black Sea shelf; natural gas from the Southern Gas Corridor (Caspian area, Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean), and LNG terminals in Greece and Turkey. Since 9 December 2019 a gas exchange has been operating in Bulgaria on which natural gas will be traded via gas release auctions  a possibility already envisaged in the Energy Sector Act. The exchange segment will be operated by Gazov Hub Balkan EAD, a subsidiary of Bulgartransgas EAD. During the initial stage of operation of the exchange, Gazov Hub Balkan EAD will provide the participants in the natural gas market in Bulgaria and the wider region with the possibility to use a platform with integrated software solutions for wholesale energy trading developed in accordance with the requirements laid down in Article 10 of Commission Regulation (EU) No 312/2014 establishing a Network Code on Gas Balancing of Transmission Networks.  On 2 January 2020, multilateral trade was launched via the trading platform of Balkan Gas Hub EAD, including the so-called short-term (spot) and long-term segments of the market and via gas brokers.   Expanding the capacity of the Chiren Underground Gas Storage (UGS) facility The project for expansion of the capacity of Chiren Underground Gas Storage (UGS) facility involves the staged increase of the capacity of the only gas storage facility in Bulgaria in order to increase gas storage volumes and pressures in the gas reservoir and achieve higher average gas extraction and pumping capacity over 24 hours. The project envisages an increase in working gas volume up to 1 billion m3 and an increase in gas extraction and pumping capacity up to 810 million m3 per day. The extension of the Chiren UGS facility is a project of common interest for the European Union within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure and is an element of the Balkan Gas hub concept.  The expanded UGS facility is expected to become operational in 2025.  The Chiren UGS facility is a major instrument enabling the functioning of the gas market in Bulgaria, which will compensate seasonal variations in domestic natural gas   145  consumption, providing the flexibility necessary to balance the differences in supply and demand and serving as an emergency reserve.  The project is highly important for the security of gas supplies. In the mid-term, the Chiren UGS facility will assume an important commercial role for the development of competition in the regional gas market, enhancing the flexibility of regional gas transmission systems and contributing to the management of excessive load and the seasonal optimisation of gas transmission networks.  Rehabilitation, upgrade and expansion of the Bulgarian gas transmission network The project is a comprehensive multi-component project for the upgrade, rehabilitation and expansion of the existing gas transmission infrastructure in Bulgaria. It will involve three stages during which the following activities will be implemented: upgrade and rehabilitation of compressor stations; repair and replacement of pipes in certain sections following inspection; expansion and upgrade of the existing network; inspections to ascertain and report on the condition of gas pipelines; implementation of systems for pipeline technical condition management optimisation.  The project for the rehabilitation and expansion of the gas transmission infrastructure in Bulgaria has been included in the list of projects of common interest for the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure as an element of the infrastructure necessary for the implementation of the Balkan Gas Hub. It is one of seven priority gas projects implemented within the framework of the Central and South East Europe Energy Connectivity (CESEC) initiative. The facilities included in the second phase of the project are expected to become operational in 2022. The Bulgarian gas infrastructure will ensure the transmission of Azeri natural gas and gas from LNG sources via the IGB to IBR and IBS, i.e. to Romania and Serbia, and onwards to Hungary and Central Europe.  Efficient use of indigenous energy resource; Diversification of the supply of fresh nuclear fuel Nuclear power is currently part of the energy mix of many EU Member States, including Bulgaria. Nuclear power plants are a major component of baseload power generating capacity and ensure the reliable supply of zero-emission electricity, thereby playing an important role in energy security.  diversification of fresh nuclear fuel supply in line with the European Energy Security Strategy adopted on 28 May 2014, which requires a completely diversified fresh nuclear fuel supply portfolio. The policy is based on the following four pillars:   146  1) Diversifying the procurement of natural uranium, its conversion and enrichment; 2) Diversifying the producers of nuclear fuel elements (cartridges); 3) Maintaining a sufficient fuel reserve within the perimeter of the nuclear power plant. 4) Concluding long-term contracts for fresh nuclear fuel supply.  In line with the EU policy and goal for lowersector on a single supplier, a process has been launched for the diversification of fresh nuclear fuel supply and the construction of a new nuclear plant, which will comply, as a matter of utmost priority, with the highest nuclear safety standards. Within the framework of diversification policy implementation, better financial and economic conditions will be considered an important advantage.  NPP Kozloduy EAD follows both national policy and EU guidelines on nuclear supply diversification in strict compliance with applicable national and EU law and co-ordinates its actions with the [Euratom] Supply Agency. The plant has developed a diversification programme, which has been co-ordinated with EURATOM (Supply Agency). In accordance with the requirements of the Nuclear Regulatory Agency (AYaR) and the diversification will take place in three stages: Stage 1  conducting a feasibility study for the purpose of obtaining a licence and switchover to an alternative nuclear fuel in Units 5 and 6;  Stage 2  drawing up report, which sets out an analysis of the safety of Units 5 and 6 during the switchover to an alternative nuclear fuel;  Stage 3  conducting a tender for the manufacturing and supply of fuel elements (cartridges).  The diversification programme of NPP Kozloduy is implemented according to schedule and the first stage is already under way. On 20 February 2019, a contract was signed for the feasibility study to be conducted as a requirement for the issuance of a licence and switching over to a new type of nuclear fuel from alternative producers of water-water energetic reactor fuel elements (WWER-1000). The feasibility study is expected to be completed in May 2020. Extension of the operational life of Units 5 and 6 of the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant  The Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant, being a baseload plant, plays is essential for the sustainability of reserves in the electricity system. It has a share of approximately 33 %  A project has been successfully implemented, which will allow the operational life of Units 5 and 6 of the Kozloduy NPP to be extended following an upgrade of the two reactors to   147  ensure that they meet the latest global safety requirements for nuclear power plants. The implementation of the project is a strong argument for the planned long-term operation of the nuclear plant. 2020 2020, adopted by the National Assembly on 1 June 2011, in 2017 and 2019 the Bulgarian Nuclear Power Regulatory Agency extended the operating licences of Units 5 and 6 for a period of ten years in accordance with the provisions laid down in national law.  The project for the extension of the operational life of the two units was implemented in two stages due to the large scale of the project:  During the first stage, which involves activities relevant to both units, a comprehensive survey and assessment of the remaining operational life of Units 5 and 6 of NPP Kozloduy was conducted by an international consortium. The compelling justification of project feasibility relied on rigorous application of a methodology of a high standard, which is fully consistent with the requirements for an EU Member State.  The results of the comprehensive survey demonstrated that the technical condition of the structures, systems and components of Units 5 and 6 conform to all applicable requirements laid down in statutory instruments and design and construction specifications for the operation of NPP Kozloduy.  During the second stage programmes were implemented to prepare the facilities for long-term operation, which included specific measures determined on the basis of the results of the comprehensive survey. A total of 240 measures were implemented to upgrade Unit 5 and 200 measures were implemented to upgrade Unit 6. The process of drafting the justification of the feasibility of extending the operational life of Unit 6 entailed safety analyses, projections and qualitative assessments of the remaining operational life of the facilities and equipment that ensure the safe and reliable operation of the Unit.    In parallel to the upgrade undertaken to extend the operational life of the two units, the regular safety review of the two units was conducted. It involved a systematic review of all safety factors having an effect on the project and on the operation of the entire nuclear power plant. The safety review is a mandatory requirement for the licensing of the plant. The results of the latest periodic review confirmed that the two Units satisfy all safety parameters and are therefore fit for operation during the next period covered by the licence. They have also demonstrated a high level of nuclear, radiation and technological safety comparable to that of the most advanced power plants. The construction of a new 2 000 MW power plant, which security, along with that of the entire region, is envisaged. Utilisation of the potential of indigenous coal in Bulgaria in compliance with applicable environmental legislation   148  Bulgaria will make maximum use of the existing potential of indigenous coal in the country in compliance with applicable environmental legislation. The coal has the potential to provide feedstocks for electricity generation in the next 60 years.  The use of indigenous coal reserves has the potential to act as a stabilising source of energy in the future. The power plants using indigenous coal account for approximately 48 competitiveness of the Bulgarian economy. They are the baseload electricity generating facilities in the Bulgarian electricity system and the main supplier of balancing services in system. This determines the role of indigenous coal as a strategic energy resource for   Network development and enhancing the flexibility of the electricity system To increase the flexibility of the energy system through energy demand response, Bulgaria plans to enact legislation with a view to establishing conditions that promote active consumer behaviour, opportunities for associations through aggregators or energy communities and their active participation in demand response in different market segments.  During the period in question, Bulgaria envisages to introduce interim measures to enable the implementation of the following reforms:  Introducing price limits on the balancing market in order to send correct price signals to investors. Maximum and minimum prices consistent with the day-ahead and intraday time intervals and in line with the Balancing Regulation.  Creating appropriate conditions and increased participation of demand response, in individual or aggregated terms, both in the wholesale market and in the balancing market.  increase interconnection capacity.  In view of the new EU energy and climate targets and the need to ensure system adequacy and achieve a high level of security of supply, a mechanism to enhance the capacity of the electricity market will be established for the next ten-year period. The leading principles to be taken into account in elaborating an electricity network   security of electricity supply to consumers;  integration of the internal and external electricity market;  lowering the harmful environmental impact through development of the renewable energy sector;   149   enhancing the electricity transmission network efficiency. The Bulgarian electricity transmission network is part of the integrated transmission network of the countries in continental Europe and its development is closely related to the development of the networks neighbouring countries. The market calculations made on the basis of the electricity supply and demand forecast of each electricity system operator show significant differences as compared to the on the region. The Turkish system operator forecasts a significant increase of new generation sources (more than 140 GW installed capacity by 2040), along with low prices of electricity and capacity for year-round export. At the same time, the Bulgarian electricity system will rely on investments in new large-scale, zero-emission sources of electricity that are available on a 24-hour basis. This is increase electricity transit flows through the national grid from the East to the West and could create bottleneck at the Bulgarian-Turkish and Bulgarian-Serbian borders, which may jeopardise free trade. Electricity transit through Bulgaria will increase even further following the potential closure of units of the Maritsa Iztok power plant. To ensure safe network operation and its network reliability and sustainability in accordance with the above principles, the following power lines will be constructed:  400 kV power line from Maritsa substation (Bulgaria) to Nea Santa substation (Greece);  power line from Plovdiv substation to Maritsa Iztok substation;  400 kV power line from Maritsa Iztok substation to Maritsa Iztok 3 power plant;  400 kV power line from Maritsa Iztok substation to Burgas substation;  400 kV power line from Burgas substation to Varna substation. The interconnecting power lines have been recognised by the European Commission as projects of common interest (PCIs). An in-depth cost analysis has been conducted in connection with their construction in accordance with the ENTSO methodology. The analysis contains an assessment of both economic indicators and technical parameters. The results of the analysis show that in view of the planned development of generation capacity and electricity consumption in the region, the construction of the power lines is justified from a technical and economic point of view. The economic benefits are mainly associated with the expected drop in electricity prices as a result of the removal of barriers to cross-border trade and the decrease in technological transmission costs. The technical advantages of the power lines are related to the improved operational efficiency of the transmission grid, which will be able to rely on uninterrupted supply. This will improve trading conditions and facilitate the procedures for obtaining various documents necessary for the purpose of obtaining construction permits. The electricity system operator has signed financing agreements under the Connecting Europe Facility for two of the abovementioned projects.   150  A new 400 kV power line connecting Bulgaria and Greece is expected to be constructed after 2030. A concept has been developed according to which the 220 kV transmission grid will no longer be developed for general system purposes, unlike the 400 kV and 110 kV grids, with the exception of completing the project for the second district electricity supply network of Ruse. The development of the 110 kV network has primarily local significance and is borne out of the need to:  improve the security of electricity supply to consumers;   improve the electricity exchange with distribution networks;   connect clients with high electricity consumption, requiring a correspondingly high level of security of supply to the grid;  connect to the grid electricity generation modules with a capacity of more than 20 MW.  Energy storage Bulgaria plans to develop several projects for electricity storage with a view to balancing and ensuring the flexibility of its system, enhancing its position as exporter and ensuring cross-border flexibility. These projects will also facilitate the further development of renewable sources and their integration into the national energy system, taking into account the variability inherent in such sources. In connection with this, the following projects are planned to be implemented:  Increasing the operational capacity of the Chaira Pumped Storage hydropower plant through the construction of the Yadenitsata reservoir, which will enable power generation equipment optimisation. Investment needs are estimated at approximately EUR 220 million  Approximately EUR 200 million is to be invested in frequency regulation batteries with a total capacity of 180 MW.  Approximately EUR 200 million is to be invested in new energy sources combined with electricity storage facilities, taking into account the most appropriate technological solution for each project (approximately 200 MW in total). Prospecting and deep-sea exploration for natural gas in the Black Sea The permits for prospecting and exploration for natural gas issued by the Ministry of Economy are expected to lead to an increase in the share of local production thereby nce on the import of natural gas. As of date, there are two active permits for prospecting and exploration of natural gas in the offshore area of the Black sea in Unit 1-21 Han Asparuh and Unit 1-14 Han Kubrat. The permits granted   151  include both the maritime areas and the shelf and deep-sea areas of the Black Sea. Both  Since July 2012, the company Total, in partnership with Repsol and OMV, has had a permit for deep-sea exploration of oil and natural gas in Unit 1-21 Han Asparuh in the Black Sea.  In November 2019, the Ministry of Energy published a call for the submission of proposals for granting permits for exploration of oil and natural gas in Unit 1-26 Tervel, which is part of Unit Burgas  deep sea area.  Network and information security (cybersecurity) The Network and information security of the energy system comprises the security of electronic communication systems and the information systems for the management of the energy system. It is a vital element of national security. The management of power networks to ensure that supply and demand are in a constant state of balance creates a continually growing need for further digitalisation. This carries certain novel risks because digitalisation exposes the energy system to the risk of cyberattacks and incidents that may jeopardise the security of energy supply.  Bulgaria will continue to make efforts to upgrade and enhance the network and information security of its energy system through strategic co-operation and exchange of information with other Member States. In accordance with Directive (EU) 2016/1148 concerning measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems across the Union, which has been transposed into the Bulgarian Cybersecurity Act, electricity and natural gas undertakings and digital service provides have an obligation to apply measures that ensure a high level of network and information security to prevent and mitigate network and information system incidents. In connection with this, a national body competent for network and information security in the energy sector was established under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Energy by a decision adopted by the Council of Ministers in April 2019 pursuant to the Cybersecurity Act. The national competent body is responsible for the organisation, co-ordination and control of the activities and measures in the area of network and information security [on the part of] the Ministry of Energy and the essential service operators in the energy sector designated in accordance with the Cybersecurity Act. In view of the crucial importance of cybersecurity for the management and functioning of the energy sector, the necessary high-tech solutions at the level of licensed hardware and software for monitoring and active cyber protection are planned to be additionally system management and operation. In parallel, the process of personnel recruitment and training at regular intervals will be accelerated.  ii. Regional co-operation in this area As a Member State of the European Union, Bulgaria works actively for the establishment   152  of a robust and sustainable Energy Union, aiming to increase the potential for regional co-operation. Bulgaria has a tradition of maintaining the best possible relations with other countries in the region, both on a bilateral basis and within the framework of broader international initiatives, such as: the Southeast European Cooperation Process, the Stability Pact and its successor the Regional Cooperation Council and the High Working Group set up under the Central and South Eastern Europe Energy Connectivity initiative (CESEC).  In accordance with Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 and within the framework of the Central and South Eastern Europe Energy Connectivity initiative CESEC) the following projects of common interest for the European Union are implemented: Greece  Bulgaria gas interconnector project; Bulgaria  Serbia gas interconnector project; and the project for the rehabilitation, upgrade and expansion of the Bulgarian gas transmission network. nd will contribute to the diversification of the sources and routes of natural gas supply while improving interconnectivity between countries in the region. The long-term and mutually beneficial development of energy relations between countries in the region also require, as a matter of priority, the adoption of single set of rules and regulations for the energy sector at EU level. iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds To finance key projects in the area of electricity transmission infrastructure, Bulgaria plans to use funds from the Connecting Europe Facility, the new facilities for financing low-carbon innovations and energy sector modernisation within phase 4 of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme and other programmes with European and national financing.  Key projects in the gas distribution infrastructure are partially financed through the European Energy Programme for Recovery, Operational Programme Innovations and Competitiveness 20142020 (OPIC), Operational Programme Development of the Competitiveness of the Bulgarian Economy and the Connecting Europe Facility programme. More detailed information about the financial measures is set out in point 5.3