2.4 Internal energy market dimension 2.4.1 Electricity interconnectivity i. The level of electricity interconnectivity that the Member State aims for in 2030 in consideration of the electricity interconnection target for 2030 of at least 15 %, with a strategy with the level from 2021 onwards defined in close cooperation with affected Member States, taking into account the 2020 interconnection target of 10 % and the following indicators of the urgency of action: 1) Price differential in the wholesale market exceeding an indicative threshold of EUR 2/MWh between Member States, regions or bidding zones; 2) Nominal transmission capacity of interconnectors below 30 % of peak load; 3) Nominal transmission capacity of interconnectors below 30 % of installed renewable generation. Each new interconnector shall be subject to a socioeconomic and environmental cost-benefit analysis and implemented only if the potential benefits outweigh the costs. In accordance with EU law each Member State must achieve an interconnectivity target of least 10 % and 15 % of domestic installed capacity by 2020 and 2030, respectively. The maximum transmission capacity of power lines and network elements must be ensured in line with applicable safety standards for network operation, including the safety standard for emergency situations. In line with applicable EU requirements, Bulgaria has set an electricity system interconnection target of at least 15 %. The target will be achieved through the implementation of projects of common interest and additional initiatives, which are described in detail below. The projections for the period after 2030, i.e. after the power lines referred to in point 2.4.2 have been constructed, are as follows:  14 600 MW  total installed generation capacity of the Bulgarian electricity system;   74   6 880 MW  transmission capacity upon export (electricity interconnection of 47.1 % upon export);  6 880 MW  transmission capacity upon import (electricity interconnection of 47.1 % upon import). The transmission capacity upon import/export indicated above will be achieved on the condition that bottlenecks in the internal electricity grids of Romania and Greece are addressed, an agreement is reached on the application of Article 16(8) of REGULATION ountries (Turkey, North Macedonia and Serbia) are calculated in co-ordinated manner. In accordance with the requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) 1999/2018, the interconnectivity strategy, in addition to being in line with the EU interconnectivity target, must also take into account three emergency indicators. On the basis of currently available data two of the emergency indicators are as follows: Table 21: Transmission capacity emergency indicators Indicator  Comment Price differential in the wholesale market exceeding an indicative threshold of EUR 2/MWh between Member States, regions or bidding zones  Nominal transmission capacity of electricity interconnectors compared to peak load Projected maximum system load for 2030  8 100 MW Projected total nominal transmission capacity of interconnected transmission lines in 2030  12 320 MW or 152 % of peak load Nominal transmission capacity of interconnected transmission lines compared to installed renewable energy power plants. The projected installed capacity for electricity generation from renewable sources in 2030 is 7 126 MW. Total nominal transmission capacity of interconnected transmission lines  12 320 MW or 173 % of the installed capacity of renewable energy power plants. Source: ESO EAD The nominal transmission capacity of interconnected transmission lines must be at least 30 % of peak load. The projected capacities for 2030 are as follows:  8 100 MW  maximum system load;  12 320 MW  total transmission capacity of interconnecting lines equal to 152 % of peak load.    75  Figure 17: Interconnectivity  Wind farms Solar plants  TPP HPP NPP   Power line 400 KV   Power line 220 KV   Power line 110 KV   Substation   New 400 KV power lines under construction Source: ESO EAD Nominal transmission capacity of interconnector transmission lines below 30 % of the installed capacity of renewable energy power plants. According to Electricity System Operator data the figures are as follows:  7 126 MW  projected installed capacity for renewable energy generation for 2030;  12 320 MW  total nominal transmission capacity of interconnected transmission lines or 173 % of the installed capacity of power plants generating energy from renewable sources. It should be noted that the nominal transmission capacity of a 400 kV power line with 2xACO500 and 3xACO400 conductors is 1 200 MW and 1 280 MW, respectively (taking into account the capacity of all conductor elements of the power line and an average power factor of 0.93). The Bulgarian electricity system operates in parallel with the electricity systems of the countries in continental Europe. The Bulgarian ES is interconnected with the common EU EES via four interconnectors with Romania; two interconnectors with Turkey; and one interconnector with Serbia, Macedonia and Greece, respectively. They are as follows:  400 kV interconnecting power line from the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant (BG) to Cancarene substation (RO);   76   400 kV interconnecting power line from the Kozloduy Nuclear Power Plant (BG) to Cancarene substation (RO);  400 kV interconnecting power line from Varna substation (BG) to Stupina substation (RO);  400 kV interconnecting power line from Dobrudzha substation (BG) to Rahman substation (RO);  400 kV interconnecting power line from TETs Maritsa Iztok 3 (BG) to Hamitabat substation (TR);  400 kV interconnecting power like from TETs Maritsa Iztok 3 (BG) to Hamitabat substation (TR);  400 kV interconnecting power line from Sofia zapad substation (BG) to Nish substation (RS);  400 kV interconnecting power line from Chervena Mogila substation (BG) to   400 kV interconnecting power line from Blagoevgrad substation (BG) to Thessaloniki substation (GR).  2.4.2 Electricity and gas transmission infrastructure i. Key electricity and gas transmission infrastructure projects, and, where relevant, modernisation projects, necessary for the achievement of objectives and targets under the five dimensions of the Energy Union Strategy The key electricity and gas transmission infrastructure and modernisation projects are:  1. In the area of electricity transmission infrastructure In order to achieve the priorities relating to European energy infrastructure, the European Commission has included several cross-border infrastructure development projects in the list of projects of common interest (PCI) approved in October 2019. They are as follows: Priority corridor North-South electricity interconnections in Central Eastern and South Eastern Europe ('NSI East Electricity').  BulgariaGreece cluster and construction of the necessary infrastructure in Bulgaria, including: o 400 kV interconnecting power line between Maritsa Iztok substation (Bulgaria) and Nea Santa substation (Greece); o 400 kV internal power line between Maritsa Iztok substation and Plovdiv substation;   77  o 400 kV internal power line between Maritsa Iztok substation and the open distribution switchyard of TPP Maritsa Iztok 3. o 400 kV internal power line between Maritsa Iztok substation and Burgas substation; All power lines to be constructed will have a capacity approximately 1 280 MW.  The Bulgariacapacity and will comprise an internal 400 kV power line between Varna substation and Burgas substation.  Bulgaria-Yadenitsa hydro-pumped storage project Yadenitsa hydro power plant is essential for electricity system balance. The project has been included in the PCI list.  2. Key gas transmission infrastructure projects In 2019, the Bulgarian regulatory body published the Ten-year plan for development of the network of Bulgartransgas EAD for the period 20192028. The plan will serve as the basis for the development of Grid Regional Investment Plans (GRIPs). [It is aligned with] the Community Grid Development Plan developed by the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas (ENTSO-G). The projects aim to ensure the security of natural gas supply to Bulgaria through the construction of gas interconnectors and expanding the storage capacity of the Chiren UGS facility both in terms of extraction and compression facilities and capacity expansion to ensure that greater volumes of natural gas can be stored. Another main goal is to provide access to natural gas to a greater number of municipalities and final customers thereby contributing to environmental protection, improving quality of life and enhancing energy security. In connection with this, there are plans to expand the existing gas transmission network to new areas in Bulgaria and build new metering and (decompression) regulating stations (DRS). In order to create a regional market in natural gas, it is essential that projects for the construction and operation of new infrastructure facilities be implemented, including projects of common interest. The GreeceBulgaria interconnector is of key importance in this respect. It is one of the seven priority projects for the EU to be implemented in parallel to the Trans-Adriatic pipeline (TAP). The Bulgarian and Greek regulatory bodies have adopted a joint decision to apply for a temporary exemption of the interconnector from the requirements for access of third countries, regulated tariffs and unbundling in accordance with Directive 2009/73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas.  The gas interconnector Greece-Bulgaria (IGB)  The interconnector has a total length of 182 km and capacity for the transportation of 3 up to 5 billion m3 of natural gas per year. Given sufficient interest, the capacity can be increased up to 10 billion m3 per year. The interconnector will be built between Komotini,   78  Greece, and Stara Zagora, Bulgaria. It will connect the transmission grids of DESFA and TAP in Komotini, Greece, and the transmission system of Bulgartransgas EAD in Stara Zagora. The project for the construction of an interconnector between Greece and Bulgaria has been included in the PCI list of the European Union with accordance with Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure. It is one of seven priority gas projects implemented within the framework of the Central and South East Europe Energy Connectivity (CESEC) initiative. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2020.  The direct effects of project implementation include real diversification of the sources of natural gas supply to Bulgaria, creating an opportunity for the supply of natural gas via the Southern Gas Corridor and from LNG sources, and connecting and transforming Bulgaria and its gas transmission system into a major part of the infrastructure for gas supply from alternative sources for the entire region of Central and Southeast Europe.  The project will ensure that Bulgaria is able to import the contracted quantity of 1 billion m3 of natural gas per year after the launch of the Shah Deniz 2 gas field in Azerbaijan. The interconnector will also provide a possibility for gas supply via the LNG terminal in Alexandroupoli from producers like the United States, Qatar, Algeria, Nigeria, etc., including Israel and Egypt in the future.   Construction of a gas interconnector between Bulgaria and Serbia (IBS)  The planned reversible gas interconnector between Bulgaria and Serbia (IBS) will connect the national gas transmission networks of the two countries. With a total length of 170 km, it will run from Novi Iskar in Bulgaria to Nis in Serbia along a route that comprises a 62.2 km section in Bulgaria. The gas interconnector will be reversible, allowing two-way gas transmission of: 1 billion m3 per annum up to 1.8 billion m3 per annum from Bulgaria to Serbia and 0.15 billion m3 per annum from Serbia to Bulgaria. The project is expected to be completed in mid-2022. The Bulgaria-Serbia interconnector is a project of common interest for the European Union within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure and a project of common interest for the EU energy community. The project is an element of the infrastructure necessary for the implementation of the Balkan gas hub. It is one of seven priority gas projects implemented within the framework of the Central and South East Europe Energy Connectivity (CESEC) initiative. The implementation of the project will ensure the diversification of routes via an interconnector, enabling the transmission of natural gas to Serbia from the new entry in the Bulgarian gas transmission network. At the same time, it will allow the importation of natural gas from Serbia in crisis situations.   Project for the construction of an LNG terminal in Alexandroupoli   79  The terminal has a rated annual capacity of 6.1 billion m³ and a storage capacity of 170 000 m³. It is a modern technological project involving the construction of an offshore floating unit for the reception, storage and re-gasification of LNG and a system comprising a subsea and an onshore gas transmission pipeline through which the natural gas will be shipped into the Greek national natural gas system and onwards to final consumers. The LNG terminal is strategically situated in proximity to the gas transmission network of the Greek national gas operator DESFA S.A. The European Commission has included the project in the PCI list in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure, including in the third and fourth lists of the European Commission. Bulgaria has been a strong advocate for the inclusion of the LNG terminal in the PCI list. The terminal is expected to start commercial operations in 2022. The rated annual capacity and LNG storage capacity of the terminal will enable Greece but also Bulgaria, Romania, North Macedonia, Serbia and Hungary to balance needs on their respective domestic markets. Bulgaria considers the Alexandroupoli terminal project as complementing the gas interconnector with Greece and the Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP). It will give it access to producers and suppliers of liquefied gas from the United States, Qatar and Algeria as well as Israel and Egypt, among other countries, in the future.  Bulgartransgas EAD will acquire a 20 % share in the LNG terminal construction project and Bulgargas EAD will participate in the legally binding stage by booking transmission he project for the construction of a liquefied natural gas terminal near Alexandroupoli is of key importance for the country and the entire region of Southeast Europe. The synergy between the LNG terminal and the construction of the interconnector between Greece and Bulgaria will contribute to the security and diversification of energy supply.  The Balkan Gas Hub The concept developed with assistance from the European Commission envisages the construction of a gas distribution centre (gas hub) in Bulgaria, including the necessary transmission infrastructure, and a natural gas exchange. The gas hub will connect the natural gas markets of all Member States in the region  Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Hungary, Croatia and Slovenia, linking the region to Central and Western Europe, and to Serbia, North Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which are members of the Energy Community. The concept for the construction of a gas distribution centre for South East Europe in Bulgaria is based on the idea of creating a gas trading platform by building infrastructure that will enable the supply of significant quantities of natural gas from different sources intended for further transportation via several physical entry points. The Balkan gas hub has been included in the PCI list of the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) 347/2013 as a group of projects that contribute to the development and enhancement of gas infrastructure. The projects for the   80  interconnectors between Bulgaria and Greece and Serbia, respectively, and for the upgrade and rehabilitation of the gas transmission network of Bulgartransgas EAD have also been included in this group. In the context of the European objectives for developing an interconnected and single European gas market, the implementation of the gas hub concept fits in with the projects for the development of the Southern Gas Corridor and in line with the plans for gas infrastructure development in Europe. The Balkan gas hub would be able to rely on natural gas supplied via the newly constructed submarine pipeline in strict compliance with the requirements for the Third Liberalisation Package of the EU and along the existing route; natural gas extracted from the Bulgarian and Romanian sections of the Black Sea shelf; natural gas from the Southern Gas Corridor (Caspian area, Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean), and LNG terminals in Greece and Turkey. Since 9 December 2019 a gas exchange has been operating in Bulgaria on which natural gas will be traded via gas release auctions  a possibility already envisaged in the Energy Sector Act. The exchange segment will be operated by Gazov Hub Balkan EAD, a subsidiary of Bulgartransgas EAD. During the initial stage of operation of the exchange, Gazov Hub Balkan EAD will provide the participants in the natural gas market in Bulgaria and the wider region with the possibility to use a platform with integrated software solutions for wholesale energy trading developed in accordance with the requirements laid down in Article 10 of Commission Regulation (EU) No 312/2014 establishing a Network Code on Gas Balancing of Transmission Networks.  On 2 January 2020, multilateral trade was launched via the trading platform of Balkan Gas Hub EAD, including the so-called short-term (spot) and long-term segments of the market and via gas brokers.   Expanding the capacity of the Chiren Underground Gas Storage (UGS) facility The project for expansion of the capacity of Chiren Underground Gas Storage (UGS) facility involves the staged increase of the capacity of the only gas storage facility in Bulgaria in order to increase gas storage volumes and pressures in the gas reservoir and achieve higher average gas extraction and pumping capacity over 24 hours. The project envisages an increase in working gas volume up to 1 billion m3 and an increase in gas extraction and pumping capacity up to 810 million m3 per day. The extension of the Chiren UGS facility is a project of common interest for the European Union within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure and is an element of the Balkan Gas hub concept.  The expanded UGS facility is expected to become operational in 2025.  The Chiren UGS facility is a major instrument enabling the functioning of the gas market in Bulgaria, which will compensate seasonal variations in domestic natural gas   81  consumption, providing the flexibility necessary to balance the differences in supply and demand and serving as an emergency reserve.  The project is highly important for the security of gas supplies. In the mid-term, the Chiren UGS facility will assume an important commercial role for the development of competition in the regional gas market, enhancing the flexibility of regional gas transmission systems and contributing to the management of excessive load and the seasonal optimisation of gas transmission networks.  Rehabilitation, upgrade and expansion of the Bulgarian gas transmission network The project is a comprehensive multi-component project for the upgrade, rehabilitation and expansion of the existing gas transmission infrastructure in Bulgaria. It will involve three stages during which the following activities will be implemented: upgrade and rehabilitation of compressor stations; repair and replacement of pipes in certain sections following inspection; expansion and upgrade of the existing network; inspections to ascertain and report on the condition of gas pipelines; implementation of systems for pipeline technical condition management optimisation.  The project for the rehabilitation and expansion of the gas transmission infrastructure in Bulgaria has been included in the list of projects of common interest for the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 on guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure as an element of the infrastructure necessary for the implementation of the Balkan Gas Hub. It is one of seven priority gas projects implemented within the framework of the Central and South East Europe Energy Connectivity (CESEC) initiative. The facilities included in the second phase of the project are expected to become operational in 2022. The Bulgarian gas infrastructure will ensure the transmission of Azeri natural gas and gas from LNG sources via the IGB to IBR and IBS, i.e. to Romania and Serbia, and onwards to Hungary and Central Europe.  ii. Where applicable, major infrastructure projects other than projects of common interest (PCIs)  Construction of a new dual 400 kV interconnecting power line between Bulgaria and Serbia  The project has been included as a new investment in the last ENTSO-E ten-year network development plan 2018. An assessment of the need to build a second interconnector between Bulgaria and Serbia has been conducted in the framework of the market surveys undertaken by the ENTSO-E regional group. The project will increase the interconnection capacity at the BulgarianSerbian border and accelerate trade flows between the western borders of Bulgaria and Romania and the Western Balkan region.  Construction of a new 400 kV power line between Bulgaria and Turkey;   82   Construction of new 400 kV internal power lines between the Vetren switchyard and Blagoevgrad substation and between Tsarevets substation and Plovdiv substation.  Upgrade and expansion of elements of the internal electricity distribution network and management systems with a view to increasing the efficiency, flexibility and security of supply;  Connecting new low-voltage and zero-emission sources of energy to the grid. 2.4.3 Market integration i. National objectives related to other aspects of the internal energy market such as increasing system flexibility, in particular related to the promotion of competitively determined electricity prices in line with relevant sectoral law, market integration and coupling aimed at increasing the tradable capacity of existing interconnectors, smart grids, aggregation, demand response, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, and real-time price signals, including a timeframe for when the objectives shall be met Electricity market liberalisation  In line with Third Liberalisation Package of the EU, Bulgaria took steps toward full liberalisation of its electricity market. As a result of the legislative amendments adopted in early 2018, the electricity generated for the free market is now traded exclusively via BNEB platforms. Developing an intraday market The producers of electricity from renewable sources are expected to make use of the opportunities offered by the intraday market in order to lower their balancing costs. In 2018, the intraday market segment was launched. It acts as a link between long-term contracting, short-term trading on the day-ahead market and the real-time (balancing) market. The launch of the intraday segment completes the overall structure on the Bulgarian market, which is now similar to that of markets in most other Member States and allows participants to modify their contractual positions in order to respond to production or consumption forecasts at significantly shorter intervals before auction bidding sessions. Participation in integration ESO EAD, together with all transmission grid operators in Europe, operates in accordance with the requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) 2015/1222. In May 2018, it signed the Agreement on the single coupling of day-ahead markets in a coordinated manner between TSOs and NEMOs (Intraday Operational Agreement, IDOA) and the TSOs Cooperation Agreement for Intraday Coupling (TCID) thereby joining, together with the   83  BNEB, the process of integration of the Bulgarian border into the common EU market within the framework of the of the Cross-Border Intraday Project (XBID). Bulgaria is part of the LIP 15 local project and has established a common intra-day cross-border market with Romania, which has been fully operational since November 2019. With this step, the Bulgarian-Romanian border will become the first border at which transmission capacity will be implicitly allocated within the intraday time frame in coupled region in Europe.   Preparatory work is currently under way to launch a project for capacity allocation in the intraday time frame at the BulgarianGreek border. The ESO and BNEB and the Greek operators (IPTO and HEnEx) have sent letters to the regulatory bodies in the two countries, requesting the BulgarianGreek border coupling project to be approved and integrated into the IBWT-Italian Border Working Table) project.  Balancing model and balancing of renewable sources regardless of the generation technology used, plant size and whether plants supply electricity at regulated or freely negotiated prices.  In Bulgaria, the total installed capacity of power plants generating renewable electricity is relatively high compared to total available capacity and the two units of NPP Kozloduy EAD, each with a capacity of 1 000 MW, that operate in a relatively small electricity system, are the reason why capacity is maintained in cold reserve mode. They also account for the availability enabling the provision of additional services (primary and secondary regulation). The integration of consumers into slow tertiary reserve provision by lowering consumption in the case capacity shortages within the electricity system has been ensured through the development of dedicated rules and conducting the first auction in October 2018. This has expanded the sources of balancing power and the potential of dispatchable generation capacity available to the operator, thereby reducing balancing costs. Grid balancing energy aggregators The ESO has launched a project implemented under the Structural Reform Support Programme (SRSP), which is focused on the development of requirements for aggregator registration, technical connectivity of the operators of electricity distribution networks to the systems of ESO EAD, communication between network operators, determination of regulating power provided and settlement of payments. After the Energy and Water Regulatory Commission (KEVR) adopted and introduced Standard Load Profiles in 2016, low-voltage household and non-household customers have the right to change their electricity supplier and bid in auctions in which electricity is traded at freely negotiated prices. Despite this, the market segment for trading at regulated prices is substantial, with a share of approximately 40 % of net electricity generation. In connection with this, in 2020 a process of phasing out regulated prices for household and small industrial consumers will be launched. Full liberalisation is expected   84  to be achieved over a period of three to five years. The derogation under Article 5(6) of Directive (EU) 2019/944 on common rules for the internal market for electricity is a temporary measure with a time horizon until the full liberalisation of the retail market for electricity. The staged elimination of regulated prices for all end consumers and of the prices for producers will boost competition among electricity suppliers. The full liberalisation of the electricity market will create conditions for enhanced system flexibility by securing conditions for achieving competitive prices while increasing liquidity on the electricity exchange.  It is a precondition for achieving the objective for full electricity market liberalisation in the common European energy market.  Integration and coupling of electricity markets In order to achieve interconnectivity targets, Bulgaria has taken specific measures to achieve electricity market integration at regional level and plans to enhance interconnectivity with Romania, Greece and North Macedonia. The respective projects are at different stages of implementation. In some cases, project implementation depends on the development of the electricity markets in the respective countries.  Table 22: Coupling of the electricity market Draft Stage of implementation: Bulgaria  Romania Day-ahead market Bulgaria participates in the Multi-Regional Coupling (MRC) and is technically prepared to launch a day-ahead market integration project. Bulgaria and Romania are implementing market coupling activities under a bilateral project, which is expected to be completed by the end of 2020. Bulgaria  Romania Intraday market Bulgaria is part of the LIP 15 local project and has established a common intraday cross-border market with Romania, which has been fully operational since November 2019. BulgariaGreece Day-ahead market The market coupling between Bulgaria and Greece will be possible after Greece introduces a day-ahead market, which is expected to take place in 2021. BulgariaNorth Macedonia Day-ahead market The coupling of the electricity markets of Bulgaria and North Macedonia depends on the establishment of an electricity exchange and a day-ahead market in the neighbouring country, which is expected to take place in 2022. XBID project The participants in the Single Intra-day Coupling (SIDC) project [formerly known as XBID] are the electricity exchange operators and electricity system operators of all EU Member States. Implementation of the LIP 15 local project: since 19 November 2019 the BulgarianRomanian border became part of the so-called second wave [of countries] that jointed XBID. The BulgarianGreek border is   85  Draft Stage of implementation: expected to join by the end of 2020. Trilateral market coupling Bulgaria  Serbia  Croatia  Launch and participation in a project for trilateral market coupling of day-ahead markets of the bidding zones of Bulgaria, Serbia and Croatia.  Regulation (EU) 2019/943 on the internal market for electricity sets a minimum cross-border transmission capacity margin of 70 % electricity transmission capacity, which respects operational security limits and takes into account contingencies. The criterion will be applied from [the beginning of] 2026. In addition, Article 15 of the Regulation requires the adoption of an action plan to adjust to the 70 % margin. In this context, the Bulgarian electricity system operator has applied for a derogation under Article 16(9) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943. The derogation is subject to approval following consultations with the regulatory bodies of neighbouring countries. The maximum period of the derogation is one year. Liberalisation of the market in natural gas The liberalisation of the market in natural gas occupies an important place in the European energy policy and is associated with the strategic goals for improved security of supply, diversification of natural gas supply sources and routes, and with the development of an interconnected and single European gas market. By expanding gas interconnections, diversifying natural gas supply sources and establishing a gas hub, conditions for the operation of a liquid exchange for trading in natural gas will be created.  With a view to implementing the Balkan gas hub concept, Bulgaria has already established a natural gas exchange, which will create a competitive environment for both consumers and traders in natural gas. The exchange has been operational since 1 December 2019. On 2 January 2020, multilateral trade commenced via the trading platform of Balkan Gas Hub EAD, including in the so-called short-term (spot) and long-term segments. An option for trading via gas brokers is also available. In line with the description set out in Section 2.4.2 the development plan for the period 20192028 published by Bulgartransgas EAD aims to expand and upgrade gas transmission infrastructure, further develop interconnection points and increase gas storage capacity. The achievement of these goals will create the necessary conditions for the operation of the Balkan regional gas distribution centre. This will create a competitive market in natural gas, providing more opportunities to market participants, along with price incentives promoting liquidity in the market in natural gas.   86  ii. Where applicable, national objectives related to the non-discriminatory participation of renewable energy, demand response and storage, including via aggregation, in all energy markets, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met In accordance with the requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) No 2019/943 and Directive (EU) 2019/944 on the internal market for electricity and in order to fully liberalise its electricity market, Bulgaria will strive to promote the participation of retail clients in consumption optimisation through aggregation. It will also adopt rules granting final customers, including those offering consumption optimisation through aggregation, [access to] all electricity markets on the same terms as those available to producers. iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to ensuring that consumers participate in the energy system and benefit from auto-production and new technologies, including smart meters Bulgaria further aims to progressively eliminate the regulatory and trade barriers, which currently prevent consumers from using, storing and selling electricity they have produced and thereby participating in the market with a view to enhancing the flexibility of the system through energy storage and consumption optimisation.  With a view to encouraging a more active and effective participation of energy consumers in the market, additional measures will be taken (further details are set out in section 3.4). These measures include:  Promotion of local energy communities within the meaning of Directive (EU) 2019/944 and adopting rules on their establishment and functioning;  Creating options, such as dynamic electricity pricing and aggregation contracts, developing platforms that enhance the transparency of information, particularly for the benefit of consumers and micro enterprises.  Developing a regulatory framework that creates incentives for consumers. The measures are intended to complement the process of liberalisation described in detail in section 2.4.3.i. The achievement of these goals is particularly important in lights of projections, which indicate that in the period 20202030 domestic electricity consumption will increase by 11 %, reaching 35 358 GWh. The highest increase is expected in the household and industrial sectors which, will retain their combined share of two-thirds of total consumption. Consumption in transport will double to approximately 953 GWh in 2030.   87  Figure 18: Increase in domestic electricity consumption (GWh)  Transport Industry Energy sector and other applications Households Sectoral services Total  Source: (B)EST model, E3-Modelling  iv. National objectives with regard to ensuring electricity system adequacy, as well as for the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met The full liberalisation of the electricity market will create conditions for enhanced system flexibility by securing conditions for achieving competitive prices while increasing liquidity on the electricity exchange.  The flexibility of the system will be enhanced by developing balancing facilities, increasing energy storage capacity and improving energy management skills.  In order to alleviate internal overloads and increase interconnection capacity, network capacity will be upgraded.   v. Where applicable, national objectives to protect energy consumers and improve the competitiveness of the retail energy sector In line with Third Liberalisation Package of the EU, Bulgaria took steps toward full liberalisation of its electricity market. The phasing out of regulated prices for all end consumers will boost competition among electricity suppliers while exposing consumers to greater price volatility. In this regard, Bulgaria will strive to provide adequate protection to vulnerable household consumers of electricity.    88   2.4.4 Energy poverty i. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to energy poverty, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met A definition of vulnerable users, criteria for identifying them and measures for their protection are currently being developed. Bulgaria is currently implementing a support scheme for persons who meet certain income-tested and property-based criteria for poverty, granting heating allowances to eligible recipients via the social assistance system throughout the heating period. The electricity market in Bulgaria is partly liberalised, with a regulated share of 40 %. The retail electricity market in Bulgaria is partly liberalised. In line with Third Liberalisation Package of the EU, Bulgaria took steps toward full liberalisation of its electricity market. Since 2007, all final consumers, including households, have been able to purchase electricity at agreed prices and freely choose their electricity supplier. Despite this, for a certain category of final customers, including households, an option is available to purchase electricity from a retailer supplier operating in the respective area at prices regulated by the Energy and Water Regulatory Commission (KEVR).  The phasing out of regulated prices for all final consumers will boost competition among electricity suppliers but it will also expose consumers to greater price volatility. In order to ensure the protection of vulnerable clients, the government will introduce support measures to ensure a smooth transition to full liberalisation (see also section 3.4.4). In connection with this Bulgaria will seek to achieve:  adequate protection of people at risk of energy poverty by providing target heating allowances via   a mechanism for the protection of vulnerable consumers following full liberalisation of electricity prices for final consumers, including households.  Building stock renovation The renovation of multi-family residential buildings with a view to upgrading them to energy class C will lower the average monthly cost of heating homes and may result in low-income households being able to improve their living conditions sufficiently to be dropped from the category of households at risk of energy poverty;   improving energy efficiency by complementing the national target under Article 7 of Directive 2012/27/EU through a requirement for the implementation of measures, as a matter of priority, to improve energy efficiency for the benefit of vulnerable clients, including households affected by energy poverty and, when appropriate, in buildings used for social housing. 