3.2 Dimension Energy Efficiency Planned policy measures and programmes to achieve the indicative national energy efficiency target for 2030 as well as other objectives referred to in point 2.2, including planned measures and instruments (also of a financial nature) to promote the energy performance of buildings, in particular with regard to the following:   117  i. Energy efficiency obligation schemes and alternative measures under Articles 7a and 7b of Directive 2012/27/EU [version amended in accordance with proposal COM(2016)761] (to be developed in accordance with Annex II)) 1) Setting the overall cumulative target by 2020 In furtherance of the national target for energy efficiency and in order to comply with the requirements of Article 7 of Directive 2012/27/EU, Bulgaria has introduced:  an energy saving obligation scheme and   alternative measures  to ensure that the overall cumulative target for energy savings in final energy consumption will be achieved by 31 December 2020. The overall cumulative energy savings target in 2020 is 1 942.7 ktoe. Its distribution is shown in the table below. Table 23: Annual breakdown of the overall cumulative energy savings target for the 20142020 period, ktoe Year 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2014 61.7 61.7 61.7 61.7 61.7 61.7 61.7 2015  61.7 61.7 61.7 61.7 61.7 61.7 2016   75.2 75.2 75.2 75.2 75.2 2017    75.2 75.2 75.2 75.2 2018     77.1 77.1 77.1 2019      77.1 77.1 2020       78.3 2) Energy efficiency obligations scheme until 2020 The individual targets for energy savings represent annual energy savings at the level of final customers to be achieved in the period 1 January 201431 December 2020. The individual targets are set as the difference between the calculated annual cumulative target and the assessed energy savings from alternative measures. The difference is distributed in proportion on the basis of the quantities of energy sold in the previous year by each obligated person among the following obligated persons:  1. end suppliers, suppliers of last resort and traders licensed to trade in electricity, which sell electricity in amounts exceeding 20 GWh per year to final customers; 2. heat transmission companies and heat power suppliers which sell heat energy in amounts exceeding 20 GWh p.a. to final customers; 3. end suppliers and traders of natural gas which sell natural gas in amounts exceeding 1 million m3 per year to final customers;   118  4. traders of liquid fuels which sell liquid fuels (excluding transport fuels) in amounts exceeding 6.5 kt p.a. to final customers; 5. traders of solid fuels which sell solid fuels in amounts exceeding 13 kt p.a. to final customers. The annual individual targets of obligated parties are established by the AUER based on declarations of the quantities of fuels and energy sold to customers in final energy consumption during the previous calendar year. The declarations must be submitted to the AUER by 1 March of every year. The list of obligated parties and their individual annual targets are updated annually to take into account the change in the volume of sales by the obligated party concerned vis-a-vis the total volume of sales by all obligated parties for the previous year. The list is updated by the AUER in the Annual Reports on the implementation of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan. In the period 20142019 the following alternative measure were applied: Alternative measure 1: Individual energy savings targets for owners of industrial systems and of state and municipal buildings According to the ZEE, in the period from 2014 to 2016, individual energy saving targets were set for the following two groups of obligated parties in addition to traders in fuels and energy:  owners of state and municipal buildings;  owners of industrial systems with annual energy consumption in excess of 3 000 MWh. The period of validity of these targets was from 2010 to 2016 but only savings made in the last three-year period from 2014 to 2016 were taken into account for the purposes of the alternative approach to the implementation of the obligations scheme. The list of obligated parties and the values of individual targets for energy savings were adopted by the Council of Ministers and their breakdown is as follows: Table 24 Values of energy savings targets for owners of buildings and owners of industrial systems Obligated parties Energy savings target for the 20102016 period Energy savings target within the alternative approach for the 20142016 period GWh p.a. ktoe p.a. GWh p.a. ktoe p.a. Owners of state and municipal buildings  521 44.8 260.5 22.4 Owners of industrial systems with energy consumption exceeding 3 year 819 70.4 409.5 35.2 Total  1 340 115.2 670 57.6   119  Allocation of responsibilities: participants and actors  Obligated parties: implement and report to the AUER on an annual basis the progress achieved in the implementation of the measure.  Energy efficiency consultants registered in the AUER public register: carry out energy efficiency audits before and after measures are implemented or make assessments of the energy savings achieved using specialised methods laid down in Regulation No E-RF-04-3 of 4.05.2016; draft a report containing an assessment of the savings achieved.  The Sustainable Energy Development Agency monitors the implementation of the measure by compiling summaries, analysing and assessing its overall implementation based on the reports submitted by the obligated parties; exercises control over the qualification and activities of energy efficiency consultants, the application of the specialised methods and the reports containing assessments of the savings achieved; verifies the energy savings achieved by the obligated parties and issues certificates; and keeps databases on the implementation of the measure. Alternative measure 2: National Programme for Energy Efficiency of Multi-Family Residential Buildings Description of the measure In 2015, Bulgaria adopted a National Programme for Energy Efficiency of Multi-Family Residential Buildings aimed at the renovation of multi-family residential buildings by implementing energy efficiency (EE) measures.  The main goal of the Programme is to improve the living conditions for citizens living in multi-family residential buildings, improve temperature comfort and improve the quality of the living environment through the implementation of EE measures. The programme provides financial and organisational support to associations of owners in multi-family residential buildings registered in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Condominium Ownership Management Act to improve energy efficiency in the buildings in which they live. Support and assistance are provided to associations of owners whose buildings meet a set of eligibility criteria determined in advance. The associations of owners apply for financial assistance to the respective municipalities. According to the selection criteria all eligible associations of owners receive a grant that covers 100 % of the costs and organisational arrangements necessary for renovation works to be undertaken until depletion of the funds available under the programme. Municipalities accept applications and documents relating to the assessment, approval and monitoring of the implementation of energy efficiency measures for the buildings. The mayor of each municipality is responsible for the implementation of the overall process of renovation of residential buildings and for the selection of contractors for the   120  implementation of the activities on the buildings in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Public Procurement Act (ZOP). All 265 municipalities in Bulgaria are eligible to participate in the Programme. To date, actions have been implemented in 143 municipalities. The Programme was implemented with national funds and had a budget of BGN 2 billion, partially in the form of State-guaranteed loans from the Bulgarian Development Bank (BBR). Its extension is contingent on additional funds becoming available. Alternative measure 3: Operational Programme Innovation and Competitiveness  Call BGI6RFOP002  3.002 Improving energy efficiency in large enterprises Description of the measure: The time horizon of the alternative measure is the period 2019-2020. Operational programme Innovation and competitiveness 20142020 (OPIC) provides grant assistance for the introduction of energy-saving technologies and renewable energy utilisation by enterprises. The programme is financed by the European Union under the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF). Grant assistance for the implementation of EE measures is provided Investment priority 3.1 Energy technologies and energy efficiency of Priority axis 3 Energy and resource efficiency of Operational Programme Innovation and Competitiveness. The beneficiaries are existing enterprises outside the sector of trade and the services sector. Call BGI6RFOP002-3.002 was launched in 2019 and 68 grant agreements have been concluded in the total amount of BGN 253 791 859.90, including BGN 122 614 711.56 in grant assistance (48.3 % grant aid intensity). The energy savings to be achieved by the enterprises under the grant agreements stand at 553 505.51 MWh per year and the expected annual GHG emissions reduction is 330 006.61 tonnes of CO2. For the purposes of Article 15(2) and in order to set the national cumulative target for energy efficiency referred to in Article 14(1) of the ZEE as an alternative measure under Article 14(7)(2), only energy savings the correspond to the amount of the grant assistance received under Call BGI6RFOP002-3.002, equal to 267 737.7 MWh (22.99 ktoe) will be used. -n the basis of actually implemented projects for the improvement of energy efficiency at enterprises. Alternative measure 4: European Economic Area Financial Mechanism 20142021   Description of the measure: The time horizon of the alternative measure is the period 20192020. The Renewable energy, Energy Efficiency and Energy Security Programme is financed by the European Economic Area (EEA) Financial Mechanism 20142021. The main goal of the programme is lowering carbon intensity and enhancing the security of supplies. It will be achieved by increasing energy generation from renewable sources, improving energy efficiency in   121  buildings, the industry and municipalities and enhancing expert capacity in the area of renewable energy and energy efficiency. In the renewable energy, energy efficiency and energy security programme area grant assistance of approximately EUR 33 million (EUR 28 million in grant assistance under the EEA Financial Mechanism and EUR 4.9 million in national co-financing) is available. For the purpose of the national cumulative energy savings target set in accordance with Article 7 of Directive result from the imp 000 MWh (10.06 ktoe) and measure    000 MWh (3.96 ktoe). The implementation of the measures commenced in 2019 and grant aid intensity is 100 %. -the basis of actually implemented projects for the improvement of energy efficiency. 3) Setting the overall cumulative target for the period 20212030 The total cumulative target for the period 2021-2030 has been set to 4 357.55 ktoe in accordance with the requirements set in Directive (EU) 2018/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 amending Directive 2012/27/EU. The data on the average sales of energy to final consumers for the period 2016-2018 are set out in the tables below Table 25: Average annual energy consumption for the period 2016-2018, ktoe  2016 2017 2018 Final energy consumption 9 731.2 9 976.0 10 003.0 Average consumption for the period 2016-2018 9 903.4 The annual allocation of the total cumulative target to be achieved in the period 2021-2030 is based on an approach of gradual increase of annual energy savings from lower levels at the beginning of the period to higher levels of increase to be reached halfway through the period.   Table 26: Annual breakdown of the overall cumulative energy savings target for the 20212030 period, ktoe Year Annual energy savings in final consumption Total 2021 69.2  69.2 2022  69.2 69.2  138.4 2023  69.2 69.2  74.05  212.45 2024  69.2 69.2  74.05 74.05  286.5 2025 69.2 69.2 74.05 74.05 92.0  378.5 2026 69.2 69.2 74.05 74.05 92.0 92.0  470.5   122  2027 69.2 69.2 74.05 74.05 92.0 92.0 92.0  562.5 2028 69.2 69.2 74.05 74.05 92.0 92.0 92.0 92.0  654.5 2029 69.2 69.2 74.05 74.05 92.0 92.0 92.0 92.0 92.0  746.5 2030 69.2 69.2 74.05 74.05 92.0 92.0 92.0 92.0 92.0 92.0 838.5 TOTAL cumulative savings for the period 20212030 period 4 357.55 4) Energy efficiency obligation scheme until 2030 To help achieve the national energy efficiency (EE) target by 31 December 2030, an energy savings obligation scheme and alternative measures will be established to ensure the achievement of the total cumulative target for energy savings in final consumption for the period 1 January 2021  31 December 2030.  The difference between the total cumulative target and the projected energy savings to be achieved through the implementation of alternative measures is allocated as individual targets for energy savings amongst the following obligated parties: 1. end suppliers, suppliers of last resort, traders licensed for the business of trade in electricity, which sell more than 20 GWh of electricity annually to final customers; 2. heat transmission companies and heat power suppliers which sell more than 20 GWh of heat power annually to final customers; 3. natural gas end suppliers and traders, which sell more than 1 million m3 annually to final customers; 4. traders in solid fuels, which sell solid fuels in amounts exceeding 500 tonnes per year to final consumers; 5. traders in solid fuels, which sell more than 13 000 tonnes of solid fuels per year to final customers. The new annual energy savings in final energy consumption expected to be achieved through the Obligations Scheme, allocated per year, are as follows:   11.07 ktoe per year (2021-2022)  11.85 ktoe per year (2023-2024)   14.72 ktoe per year 2025-2030) Expected cumulative savings in final energy consumption for the period 2021-2030  697.21 ktoe Alternative measures 1) Grant assistance for the implementation for energy efficiency and renewable energy measures under operational programmes (Operational Programme Environment and Operational Programme Innovation and Competitiveness) Type of policy measure Financial instrument   123  Short description of the policy measure  The operational programmes are co-financed by the European Union through the European Regional Development Find and 50 % and 100 %.  Planned or estimated budget The estimated budget of the two operational programmes for the period 2021-2030 is BGN 1 398 579 million  Expected cumulative savings in final energy consumption 712.32 ktoe Projected new annual energy savings in final energy consumption  11.31 ktoe p.a. (2021-2022)  12.12 ktoe p.a. (2023-2024)  15.03 ktoe p.a. 2025-2030) Ensuring that all public bodies, participants or stakeholders fulfill their obligations relating to policy measure implementation Managing Authority of Operational Programme Environment  Directorate-General Operational Programme Environment of the Ministry of Environment and Water Managing Authority of Operational Programme Innovation and Competitiveness  Directorate-General EU Fund for Competitiveness of the Ministry of Economy Target sectors Household, industry, services   2) Introducing a national mechanism for financing energy efficiency Type of policy measure National mechanism for financing energy efficiency (NMFEE) Short description of the policy measure  The aims of the mechanism are in line with the aims of European financial institutions to expand access to competitive financing by enhancing:  the process of mobilising private financing; and  the efficient use of grant assistance. The national mechanism envisages financing through different mechanisms and financial instruments, including credit lines, guarantees or combinations of the two, etc. The NMFEE also envisages technical assistance for the implementation of energy efficiency projects. The financing of integrated measures and the development of appropriate instruments for financing individual energy efficiency measures under the mechanism is further envisaged. The assistance will target the achievement of energy efficiency in:  the industrial sector;  transport and infrastructure;  the public sector;  The sector of residential and non-residential buildings. The necessary financing will be provided from different sources, including the European Structural and Investment Funds, the European Investment Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Just Transition Fund, Invest EU, etc. The engagement of local banks and international financial   124  institutions in this financial initiative is a key requirement for the successful implementation of the Mechanism because it can significantly simplify the lending process.  Planned or estimated budget The estimated budget of the measure for the period 2021-2030 is BGN 7 800 million Expected cumulative energy savings in final energy consumption 2 948.02 ktoe Projected new annual energy savings in final energy consumption  46.8 ktoe p.a. (2021-2022) 50.1 ktoe p.a. (2023-2024)  62.3 ktoe p.a. 2025-2030) Target sectors Households, Industry, Services, Transport  ii. Long-term renovation strategy to support the renovation of the national stock of residential and non-residential buildings, both public and private, including policies, measures and actions to stimulate cost-effective deep renovation and policies and actions to target the worst performing segments of the national building stock, in accordance with Article 2a of Directive 2010/31/EU In order to achieve the target for decarbonisation and high energy efficiency of building stock, a long-term strategy for support of the renovation of the national residential and non-residential building stock until 2050 is currently being developed. The strategy will envisage measures for the construction of new buildings and the conversion of existing buildings into nearly zero-energy buildings, improvement of the energy characteristics of residential and non-residential buildings and promotion of the introduction of smart technologies in buildings.   Table 27: Existing measures, which will be extended beyond 2021 Measure Savings achieved 20142018: GWh p.a. Expected contribution to the achievement of the national energy efficiency target 2020 GWh p.a. Non-residential buildings 1. Central and local government energy efficiency improvement programmes and energy efficiency management in public buildings(1) 792.5 911.9 Total non-residential buildings* 792.5 911.9   125  Measure Savings achieved 20142018: GWh p.a. Expected contribution to the achievement of the national energy efficiency target 2020 GWh p.a. Including net energy savings from:   1.1. Buildings of the central government administration(2) 71.61 119.4 1.2. Energy Efficiency and Renewable Sources Fund(3) 28.9 40.32 1.3. Operational programme Regional Development 20072013/Regions in Growth 20142020(3) 177.2 248.1 1.4.  National Trust Eco Fund  Climate Investment Programme(3) 21.2 42.4 1.5. Kozloduy International Decommissioning Support Fund (KIDSF) 98.9 98.9 1.6 Programme BG04 Energy efficiency and renewable energy (the Programme);(4) - 12.8 Residential buildings 1. National Energy Efficiency of Multi-Family Residential Buildings Programme (20162020)(5) 679.8 975.6 2. Residential Energy Efficiency Credit Line Programme(3) 54 75.6 3. GAS) - 70 Total for residential buildings 733.8 1 121.2 Total for all measures in buildings 1 526.3 2 033.7  *To prevent double accounting of the effect of implementation of energy efficiency measures in the sector of public buildings of the central and local government, [the sector] has been included in emented by central government institutions and local authorities and for energy efficiency management in public reported by the obligated administrations in their respective annual reports on energy efficiency management. The projected energy savings to be achieved as a result of the implementation of policy measures for the improvement of energy efficiency in the period 2019-2020 rely on the following assumptions:   126   (1) The implementation of the measure and the energy savings to be achieved during the period 2019-2020 will be consistent with the levels achieved during the period 2014-2018.  (2) The projection is based on the calculations set out in the National plan for improving the energy performance of heated and/or cooled State-owned buildings occupied by the public administration;  (3) Energy savings will continue to be achieved at a rate consistent with that during the period 2014-2018. (4) The estimation is based on  the following parameters set in the Programme. improving the energy performance of 8 buildings  maximum grant assistance amount per project BGN 1.2 million  BGN 1 500 / MWh energy saved (estimated on the basis of actually implemented projects for energy efficiency improvement)  iii. Description of policy measures to promote energy services in the public sector and measures to remove regulatory and non-regulatory barriers that impede the uptake of energy performance contracting and other energy efficiency service models The rules governing the provision of energy performance services are stipulated in the ZEE. According to the ZEE energy services aim to combine energy supply with an energy efficient technology and/or an action encompassing the operation, maintenance and management required for the delivery of the service and lead to energy efficiency improvement and/or saving of primary energy resources that can be verified, measured or estimated. Energy efficiency services are provided on the basis of written contracts concluded with final energy consumers. The ZEE also identifies the persons entitled to carry out energy efficiency services: natural or legal persons which are merchants within the meaning of the Commerce Act or within the meaning of the law of another Member State of the European Union or of another State which is a contracting party to the Agreement on the European Economic Area. Energy performance contracts are an essential incentive for the continued development the market for energy efficient services. Under this type of contract, investments are recovered and the fees payable to the energy service companies (ESCOs) are paid from energy savings achieved. ESCOs provide a performance guarantee which also guarantees the energy savings to be achieved as a result of the project implementation.  The buildings owned by the central government and/or the municipalities and subject to energy performance contracting must comply with Regulation No RD-16-347 of 2 April 2009 laying down the requirements and procedure for determining the amount and disbursing funds under energy performance contracts leading to energy savings in   127  buildings owned by the central government and/or municipalities. The AUER participates in the examination and approval of funds for the execution of energy performance contracts in buildings owned by the state and/or municipalities, sends reasoned proposals to the Ministry of Finance for funding and payment of the funds and certifies that no certificate has been issued for the respective building as a result of activities completed under other programmes. The AUER is the national administrator of the European Code of Conduct for EPC. The y Europe programme. The Code combines values and principles that are necessary for the successful preparation and implementation of EPC projects in European countries and governs the principles of conduct of the EPC suppliers in particular. Documents relating to the Code are available on the AUER website.  A standard ESCO contract for the industry sector, which contains a set of the minimum requisite standard clauses, has been developed within the framework of a project financed by Operational Programme Innovation and Competitiveness 2014-2020 with a view to facilitating the contracting parties to ESCO agreements. A model contract and methodology for assessment of the energy savings achieved under ESCO contracts have additionally been developed, along with a indicative bill of quantities and repayment schedule. All documents have been published on the AUER website. iv. Other planned policies, measures and programmes to achieve the indicative national energy efficiency contributions for 2030 as well as other objectives referred to in point 2.2 (for example measures to promote the exemplary role of public buildings and energy-efficient public procurement, measures to promote energy audits and energy management systems, consumer information and training measures, and other measures to promote energy efficiency) To achieve the national target for a share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption by 2030, both existing and additional policies and measures will be implemented:  Promote the exemplary role of public buildings In accordance with Directives 2010/31/EU and 2012/27/EU public authorities at national, regional and local level should lead by example in the area of energy efficiency. In this regard, Bulgaria has set a more ambitious target for renovation of buildings owned and used by the central administration, setting out in Article 23(1) of the ZEE a legal requirement that measures shall be taken on an annual basis to improve the energy performance of at least 5 % of the total gross floor area of all heated and cooled state-owned buildings used by the public administration. The reasons to impose a more ambitious target include both the need to reduce energy consumption in the buildings due to its long-term impact and the fact that the buildings owned by the public   128  authorities serve as an incentive because they account for a large share of the building stock and have high visibility in public life.  In addition, the following measures will be taken to support the achievement of a highly efficient and decarbonised building stock:  Developing and conducting periodic reviews of the minimum requirements for the energy performance of buildings at optimal cost and alignment of the technical requirements for design, construction and maintenance of structurally sound, healthy, high-tech and energy efficiency buildings with relevant EU law; Improvement of the life cycle of buildings for the period 20152030;   Applied research in the area of energy efficiency of buildings to be undertaken in the period 2015-2030 to ensure that the energy performance standards of buildings are developed on the basis of scientific knowledge.  Improvement of the conditions for the uptake in the construction sector of products that ensure compliance with the basic requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) 305/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2011 laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products and repealing Council Directive 89/106/EEC (Text with EEA relevance) and Regulation (EU) 2019/515 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2019 on the mutual recognition of goods lawfully marketed in another Member State and repealing Regulation (EC) No 764/2008; Development of national standards for construction products harmonised with EU technical legislation, including the requirements for energy saving, heat conservation, sustainable use of natural resources, recycling and re-use of construction products in the period 2015-2030;  Improvement of the functioning of the contact point for construction products (CPCP) in accordance with Regulation (EU) 305/2011 and Regulation (EU) 2019/515 and improvement of the conditions for the free movement of construction materials by further developing and maintaining the CPCP information platform in the period 20152030;  Preparation and launch of a digital platform for the Bulgarian construction sector in the period 20212030: o Development and implementation of a strategy and national plan for digitalisation of the construction sector;  o Development of standards and regulations for the implementation of digitalisation and building information modelling (BIM) in the construction sector, including the necessary accompanying analyses; o Implementation of the digital reform in the construction industry;   129   Upgrading existing building stock to a level of optimal energy consumption to achieve the standards for buildings with near zero-energy consumption with a time horizon 20212030;   Implementation of the optional Smart Readiness Indictor for Buildings of the Community and adapting the methodology for SRI calculation established by the European Commission by taking national specificities into account, including an assessment of existing national schemes for energy performance certification with a time horizon 20212030;   Strengthening the capacity and expanding the activity of the National expert council with a view to promoting and increasing the number of buildings with nearly zero-energy consumption in an effective way with a time horizon 2021-2030.    Energy-efficient public procurement According to Article 30a of the ZEE in the case of award of public procurement contracts public contracting entities must purchase only products, services and buildings with high energy efficiency indicators, including: 1. products that meet the criterion of belonging to the highest energy efficiency class;  2. office equipment that is included in and meets the requirements of Appendix C of the Agreement between the Government of the United States of America and the European Community on the coordination of energy-efficiency labelling programmes for office equipment (OJ L 63/7 of 6.3.2013); 3.  tyres that meet the criterion of belonging to the highest fuel efficiency class, as stipulated in Regulation (EC) No 1222/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency and other essential parameters (OJ L 342/46 of 22.12.2009),   4. buildings meeting the minimum requirements for energy performance, as attested by an energy performance certificate.   Energy audits and management systems All of the following shall be subject to mandatory energy efficiency audit:  all enterprises in the manufacturing sector other than small and medium-sized enterprises within the meaning of Article 3 of the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Act;   130   all enterprises in the services sector that are not small and medium-sized enterprises within the meaning of Article 3 of the Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Act;  industrial systems with annual energy consumption in excess of 3000 MWh;   all outdoor artificial lighting systems located in settlements with population exceeding 20 000 inhabitants. Energy audits shall be performed at least once in every 4 years. The enterprises and the owners of industrial systems, which implement energy management or environmental management systems subject to certification by an independent body for conformity with European or international standards, are exempted from the requirements for mandatory energy efficiency audit, provided that the management system implemented thereby includes an energy audit of the enterprise or the industrial system concerned. Within one month of acquiring the certificate, said enterprises and owners of industrial systems must notify the AUER that they apply an energy or environmental management system and provide evidence that the management system implemented meets the minimum energy audit requirements. The owners of enterprises, industrial systems and systems for outdoor artificial lighting have obligations for energy efficiency management. Energy efficiency is managed by maintaining databases of the monthly energy generation and consumption by type of energy, carrying out annual analyses of energy consumption and implementation of other energy efficiency improvement measures. For the purposes of energy efficiency management, the obligated parties are required to prepare annual reports based on a model approved by the AUER and submit them to the Agency not later than 1 March of the year following the reporting year.  In accordance with Directive 2010/31/EU Bulgaria has put in place a system for energy efficiency audit and certification of buildings with a total gross floor area exceeding 250 m2. The energy performance certificate of a building in use shall be updated when any of the following activities are performed and result in altering the energy performance of the building:  refurbishment;  reconstruction, major renovation or overhaul when more than 25 per cent of the building envelope are covered.  The owners of buildings with a total gross floor area exceeding 250 m2 must implement the measures for achieving the minimum required energy consumption class prescribed by the first audit within three years from the date of accepting the results of the audit. State and municipal administrations, which own public buildings in the tertiary sector are obliged to manage energy efficiency. The management is carried out by implementing programmes, activities and measures for energy efficiency improvement and conducting   131  annual analyses of energy consumption. For the purpose of energy efficiency management, the owners of enterprises, similarly to the owners of buildings, are also obligated to draw up annual reports based on a model and submit these to the AUER.  A completed energy efficiency audit or applying a certified energy management or environmental management system is one of the criteria to be met by enterprises when applying for support under Regulation No E-RD-04-06 of 28 September 2016 on lowering the burden relating to renewable energy costs (the Regulation). Enterprises that apply for such assistance are also required to manage their energy efficiency and submit to the AUER a report on their energy efficiency management activities. The Regulation was issued pursuant to Article 4(2)(21) of the ZE and is in line with the Guidelines on State aid for environmental protection for the period 2014-2020. It lays down the requirements and procedure for granting aid to enterprises in sectors at risk due to the costs arising from the financial support for energy from renewable sources, aiming to help the enterprises presence their competitiveness.   Metering and billing  Electricity metering According to the ZE the electricity supplied to final consumers must be metered by means of commercial metering devices owned by the operator of the electricity transmission network or the operator of the respective electricity distribution network customers shall not pay a fee for the commercial metering devices. The structure of the electricity market and the conditions for participation in that market are laid down in the Rules for Trading in Electricity issued by the Energy and Water Regulatory Commission. Heat metering One of the main methods used to measure as one of the energy efficiency measures Bulgaria was required to implement as a condition for its accession to the EU. Heating cost share allocation devices (heat allocation devices, water meters and apartment heat meters) allow the total space- and water-heating energy to be allocated among individual properties. Heat allocation in the methodology set out in an annex to Regulation No 16-334 of 6 April 2007 on heat supply. Substations in Bulgaria are equipped with heat metering devices from which readings are taken on a monthly basis. On the basis of the readings, the energy used for heating is allocated among the customers according to the energy consumption of each property for the previous heating season. The heat distribution utility bills consumers on a monthly basis and issues invoices indicating these data. After the readings are taken from the meters at the   132  end of the heating season, the heat accountant draws up a balancing invoice. Calculations are made on the basis of the actual consumption by each property. Following the implementation of this measure, individual heat distribution devices and appliances that allow heat supply to be regulated were installed on practically all heating fixtures. With regard to the fact that common heating systems and household hot water systems exist in most of the buildings, the legal framework provides for both transparency and accuracy of accounting for individual consumption and transparent rules on the allocation of the costs for consumption of heat energy and hot water in multi-functional buildings supplied from a district heating source. The building supply systems of customers are connected to the heat transmission network by means of a connecting heating pipeline and a subscriber substation. Where a new building is connected, a competitively priced individual heat meter is installed in each separate property in the building. Where an existing building is connected after major renovation and remodelling of the building heat-supply systems from vertical to horizontal distribution, a competitively priced individual heat meter is installed in each separate property in the building. Natural gas metering The natural gas transmitted via a gas distribution network is measured in the gas metering points owned by the gas distribution company. These points are located along the gas distribution network in line with the regulatory requirements for network design, construction and operation. The natural gas transmitted via a gas distribution network is metered by gas meters owned by the gas distribution company and installed before the gas pipeline reaches the commercial measuring devices along the gas transmission and gas distribution networks in accordance with the legal framework for commercial measuring: Measurements Act and Rules for trading in natural gas. Invoicing The methods and requirements for billing end users are stipulated in the ZE. The energy companies must provide to their users of energy services information about:  the payment, the prices of stopping or resuming supply, the prices of services for carrying out maintenance and the prices of other services related to the licensed activity;  the procedure for change of supplier and information that users of energy services do not owe additional payments when changing their supplier;  the actually consumed quantities and expenses incurred without obligation for additional payment for this service;   133   the preparation of a final balancing bill each time when the supplier is changed;  the share of each energy source in the total energy supplied during the previous calendar year in an understandable and clearly comparable manner;  the existing sources of publicly accessible information about the environmental impact in relation at least to emissions of carbon dioxide and radioactive wastes resulting from production of electricity from various energy sources in the total energy supplied by the provider during the previous year;  the dispute settlement mechanisms available. The information must be presented in the invoices or in information materials accompanying them and published on the websites of the energy companies. In accordance with this procedure, the suppliers of energy and natural gas shall also provide to the users of energy services a checklist adopted by the EC, containing practical information about their rights. The ZE also requires from the end supplier to inform the customer, together with the invoice for the last month of each 6-month period, when the metered consumption of electricity or natural gas of the end customer for this 6-month period exceeds by over 50 per cent the consumption metered for the respective 6-month period of the previous calendar year. In addition, many energy suppliers provide on their websites detailed information on the content of invoices they issue to end users. Some launch additional initiatives such as e-mailing or mailing their clients explanations about the content of energy consumption invoices.  Improving energy efficiency in transport The main measures Bulgaria implements with a view to improving energy efficiency in transport can be summarised as follows: a) Increasing the share of public electric transport The measure includes:  railway infrastructure upgrade;  renewal of the rolling stock of electric rail transport. For the period 20142020 more than EUR 1 billion in financing from the EU funds has been made available for the completion of the Serbia  Sofia  Plovdiv  Burgas railway line. Tenders will be launched for the purchase of rolling stock to ensure that at least the following rolling stock will be put into operation in the period 20212030:  approximately 15 medium-distance trains; and  30 to 50 new wagons.   134  This is expected to be sufficient to ensure travel to more than 4 000 short- and medium-distance destinations. The project for extension of the Sofia metro, Line 3: Vladimir Vazov Blvd.  City Centre  Ovcha Kupel  Ring Road is implemented with EU funding. The third metro line is expected to become operational by the end of 2020. b) Training in fuel-efficient driving The Ministry of Transport, Information Technology and Communications promotes and facilitates special courses aiming to improve the fuel-efficient driving skills of drivers. The courses will include a module on the driving of motor vehicles which, in line with safety requirements, includes topics such as skills for fuel efficiency optimisation by making full use of the vehicle design and fuel-efficient driving techniques. c) Increasing the share of electric and hybrid motor vehicles and expanding charging stations infrastructure for electric and hybrid vehicles in urban areas Charging stations for electric vehicles are still a fledgling industry in Bulgaria, with infrastructure currently being built by private investors at municipal level. As at September 2019, a total of 149 charging stations have been installed. In September 2018, there were only 82 charging stations. It is necessary to introduce appropriate financial incentives and administrative measures, including incentives for the deployment of adequate charging infrastructure that is commensurate to needs. Since 2016, a pilot scheme has been implemented for the purchase of electric and hybrid vehicles in the public administration. The scheme is administered by the National Trust Eco Fund and entails the grant of dedicated subsidies. The National framework for the development of the market of alternative fuels in transport and the deployment of the relevant infrastructure envisages a number of potential measures for the entry of electric vehicles.  Establishing standards for energy consumption in motion (applicable to both initial vehicle registration but also for any subsequent sale/registration of motor vehicles);  Establishing limit values for the emissions from passenger vehicles (applicable to both initial vehicle registration but also for any subsequent sale/registration of motor vehicles);  Introducing areas (particularly in city centres) accessible solely by energy-efficient low-emission motor vehicles;  Introducing progressive taxation aiming to promote the use of energy efficient, low emission motor vehicles;  Granting direct subsidies for the purchase of new zero-emission vehicles (subject to restrictions such as a minimum number of vehicles being reached over a certain period of time);   135   Granting tax credits for the purchase and use of zero-emission motor vehicles (subject to restrictions such as a minimum number of vehicles being reaches over a certain time);  Providing access to bus lane to zero-emission vehicles (subject to restrictions such as a minimum number of vehicles being reaches over a certain time);  Use of electric vehicles for the purposes of the public administration and local authorities;  Promotion of the take-up of zero-emission vehicles in car-pooling;  Providing incentives for the transition of taxi companies and public transport operators to zero-emission vehicles. As at 31 December 2018, the number of electric vehicles increased by 50 % on an annual basis (from 981 vehicles to 1 471 vehicles) and the number of hybrid vehicles increased by 55 % (from 4 009 vehicles to 6 226 vehicles) compared to the end of 2017. Municipalities have to develop investment programmes for electric transport. By way of example, there are plans to purchase up to 30 high-speed standard low-floor electrical buses and 12 charging stations under the Electric Mobility Programme of Sofia Municipality. In 2017, the Central European Project was approved under the Connecting Europe Facility. The project aims to finance the construction of a network of ultra-fast charging stations (up to 350 kW) for electric vehicles in Central Europe. The project envisages the installation of a total of 118 charging stations within the perimeter of the TEN-T network.   Consumer information and training programmes  The measure aims to raise consumer awareness of the electricity, energy for heating and natural gas they use and of the benefits of implementing energy efficiency measures. Electricity retails publish on their websites energy saving tips and maintain online archives of e-invoices. The companies have consultants on energy efficiency to help customers reduce their energy consumption without expensive investments and complex repairs. In addition to being applied by energy traders across the country as part of their awareness campaigns and initiatives, the measure is supported by regional and local governments countrywide. Different initiatives to raise consumer awareness are included in the energy efficiency enhancement programmes of regional and local authorities drawn up in fulfilment of the obligations referred to in Article 12 of the ZEE. The initiatives envisage the establishment of consumer councils, organising consumer days and a number of campaigns in regional and municipal centres where customers can learn how to save energy.  Information campaigns and implementation of behavioural measures are listed as eligible measures in Regulation No E-RD-04-3 of 4 May 2016 on the eligible energy saving   136  measures at FEC level, the methods to prove achieved energy savings and the requirements to the methodologies and methods to asses and verify the savings.  To support the implementation of the measure, specialised methodologies were developed for assessing energy savings after the application of different behavioural measures pursuant to Regulation No E-RD-04-3 of 4 May 2016. The methodologies are developed on the basis of a model approved by the Regulation and are subject to discussion by expert groups set up by AUER in line with the same Regulation.  Availability of qualification, accreditation and certification schemes The conditions and procedure for acquisition and recognition of qualifications for energy efficiency audits of buildings and industrial systems and certification of buildings are laid down in the ZEE. Energy efficiency audits, certification of buildings, conformity assessments of investment projects and energy saving assessments are carried out by persons registered in public registers maintained by the AUER. The ZEE sets out the requirements to be met by the relevant persons and detailed requirements are set out in Regulation No RD-16-301 of 10 March 2014 on the information subject to entry in the registers kept by the persons performing audits and certification of buildings and energy efficiency audits of industrial systems, the procedure for obtaining information from the registers, the terms and procedure for acquiring qualification and the technical devices required for the performance of audit and certification activities. The persons registered in the public register of AUER hold a certificate of successfully passed examinations for upgrading their qualifications to perform audits and certification of buildings and energy efficiency audits of industrial systems.  Mandatory staged decommissioning of solid-fuel heating devices that do not meet the requirements of the Eco-design Regulations (EU) 2015/1185 and (EU) 2015/1189 and replacing said devices with other heating devices; The draft National Programme for Improving the Ambient Air Quality 20182020 includes a measure relating to household heating: mandatory staged decommissioning from 2020 to 2024 of solid-fuel stoves and boilers that do not meet the requirements of the Eco-Design Regulations and implementation of alternative heating measures to contribute with 78 % to the expected reduction in PM10 emissions in the residential heating sector. The final objective of the measure is the staged decommissioning of inefficient solid-fuel heating devices. v. Where applicable, a description of policies and measures to promote the role of local renewable energy communities in contributing to the implementation of policies and measures in points i, ii, iii and iv Currently not applicable    137  vi. Description of measures to develop measures to utilise energy efficiency potentials of gas and electricity infrastructure To ensure efficient use of energy in production, transmission and distribution, the ZE lays down requirements to be taken into account by the Energy and Water Regulatory Commission when setting the prices of electricity, heat and natural gas. In the course of exercising its powers under this Act, the KEVR:    determines maximum amounts of technology costs in the generation, transmission and distribution of electricity, the generation and transmission of heat and the transmission, distribution and storage of natural gas which can be recognised in pricing regulation in accordance with a methodology or instructions adopted by the Commission;  requires from electricity and gas network operators to make an assessment of the energy efficiency potentials of the networks concerned through reduction of technical losses; said assessment shall include an analysis of transmission, distribution, load management, network functioning and access possibilities for distributed energy production;  requires from network operators to include measures and to plan relevant investments for energy efficiency improvement of gas and electricity networks when developing network development plans and provide a timeframe for their implementation. The KEVR has also powers to assess the cost-effectiveness of the implementation of intelligent metering systems proposed by the operators of the networks. Where the implementation is cost-effective, the KEVR draws up schedules for the implementation of intelligent metering systems and guarantees the interoperability of the said systems taking into account suitable standards, best practices and their significance for the development of the domestic market of electricity and natural gas. In addition, according to the ZE the KEVR is guided by the following general principles in the exercise of its regulatory powers:   promotion of the improvement of energy efficiency in energy and natural gas production, transmission and final consumption; and   provision of incentives for transmission and distribution network operators to make available system services to final customers permitting them to implement energy efficiency improvement measures with the deployment of smart grids, taking into account the costs and benefits of each measures, while ensuring the security of the system. With regard to price regulation, the KEVR aims to ensure that electricity transmission and distribution prices do not restrict energy efficiency improvement in energy production, transmission and distribution, (demand response participates in balancing markets and ancillary services procurement, and network tariffs reflect cost savings in networks   138  achieved by consumers, decentralisation of energy generation, reduction of cost of supply or for network investment and the more optimal operation of the networks.  As regards demand response, the KEVR is guided by the principle that electricity transmission and distribution prices should allow increased final customer participation in the efficiency improvement of the grid system through demand response. The KEVR also aims to encourage transmission and distribution network operators to make available system services for electricity demand response measures, demand management and distributed generation on organised electricity markets and to improve efficiency in network design and operation, in particular:  shifting of the load from peak to off-peak times by final customers taking into account the availability of renewable energy, energy from cogeneration and distributed generation;  energy savings from demand response of distributed generation sources through a combination of making available energy-efficient services and participation in the balancing market for electricity;  demand reduction to be achieved by energy efficiency measures undertaken by energy efficiency service providers;  connection and dispatch of electricity generation sources at medium and low voltage levels;  connection of electricity generation sources from closer location to the point of consumption;  providing access to the networks for energy storage facilities. Another objective is to introduce dynamic pricing for demand response measures by final customers by means of:  time-of-use prices;  critical peak pricing;  real time pricing;  peak time rebates for lower consumption. Measures at the level of gas distribution companies Gas distribution companies apply the following energy efficiency measures: 1. Measures relating to control and diagnostics of the technical condition of networks:  grouping of gas pipelines by age since commissioning and introducing a shorter control period for patrolling and searching for natural gas leakages in the older sections;  grouping of gas pipelines by frequency of bursting and leakage; analysing the balance of entry-exit from the gas distribution network.   139  2. Locating natural gas leakage. 3. Measures for preventing damages caused by third parties: analysis and prevention of third-party actions that break the integrity of the network and result in natural gas leakage: restricting the access to and guarding the facilities.  4. Measures during construction and filling of gas distribution networks: using certified materials and contractors. 5. Operational measures:  pressure control;  natural gas odourisation;  patrolling of the gas distribution network at regular intervals;  building a system for remote observation of the values of electrochemical safeguards of metal gas pipelines;  new subscribers will be connected by wedge under pressure in order to reduce technical losses;  introducing intelligent metering systems in gas distribution networks. Measures at the level of electricity distribution companies As regards measures for reducing technical losses in electricity transmission and distribution via the electricity distribution network, the network operators carry out the following activities: 1. Reducing technical losses in electricity transmission and distribution by means of:  increasing the cross-section of medium- and low-voltage conductors in cable and overhead networks;  building new transformer units to reduce the length of outlets of low voltage networks and/or redistribute power loads;  replacing installed power transformers by new ones, with lower losses of energy in no-load condition and short circuiting;  thermal imaging audit of transformers, medium and low voltage units to detect problem areas with rising temperature. 2. Increasing the reliability of measuring the quantity of electricity that is received in or leaves the electricity distribution grid and limiting the option for its unauthorised use through:  replacement of commercial metering devices;  securing and re-locating commercial metering devices on the boundary of ownership;  building SMART GRID networks.   140  Measures of district heating companies The potential for energy efficiency of the central heating and cooling infrastructure can be achieved by rehabilitation of heat transmission networks and replacing obsolete direct subscriber district heating stations with modern highly efficient automated indirect stations which would reduce heat transmission and distribution losses and would result in reduction of GHG emissions. The best practices associated with the use of pre-insulated pipes in district heating systems help reduce losses to 3 %. A similar loss level can be achieved for high-power density systems. In the context of the national conditions in Bulgaria, it is assumed that the average power density of district heating systems will make it possible to reduce heat losses to 10 % by using the best available technology. In order to reduce losses to 10 % (against current average losses of 23.7 %), district heating networks need to be modernised so as to reduce annual losses from 2.77 to 1.17 TJ/km. As the length of the heat transmission network (1 898 km) is closely related to the amount of transmission losses, it can be assumed that the requirement to reduce losses per one kilometre of network to 1.17 TJ/km should apply to all district heating systems in the country. The potential of district heating systems based on energy efficiency improvement is estimated at 1.6 TJ, or 30.3 % of the heat which is currently lost in the transmission of the heat exchange medium. vii. Regional cooperation in this area, where applicable Not applicable viii. Financing measures, including Union support and the use of Union funds at national level The planned amendments to the ZEE will introduce a requirement according to which the schemes and mechanisms developed to promote energy efficiency in buildings must take into account the estimated or achieved energy savings, taking into account one or several of the following criteria: 1. the energy performance of the equipment or materials used in implementing energy efficiency measures in the building, installation of the equipment or materials by persons who are properly qualified for the task in accordance with the requirements laid down in the Vocational Education and Training Act; 2. standard values for the calculation of energy savings in buildings; 3. comparative analysis of energy performance certificates issued before and after the upgrade of the energy performance of the building. 4. the results from the energy efficiency audit or another transparent and proportionate method, which demonstrates an improvement of energy performance. The policy measures set out in the INECP will be funded from the budgets of the relevant ministries, bodies and other government agencies for the respective year. The implementation of energy efficiency measures will be supported via well-designed and effective financial instruments. At the same time, co-operation between public and   141  private stakeholders for the development of large-scale investment programmes and financing mechanisms will be promoted. To this end, both EU funds and other schemes for financing energy efficiency measures will be used.  1. Structural funds for the period 2021-2027 During the period covered by the next Multi-annual financial framework (2021-2027) Bulgaria intends to make use of EU Structural Funds as an instrument to finance energy efficiency measures.  In connection with this, the following investment priorities have been determined:  Support for improvement of the energy efficiency of public, industrial and residential buildings through complete renovation;  Support for the implementation of measures to improve the energy efficiency of small and medium enterprises, large enterprises and the local authorities. 2. Invest EU Programme; 3. Modernisation Fund; 4. Energy Efficiency and Renewable Sources Fund 5. National Programme for Energy Efficiency of Multi-Family Residential Buildings; 6. National Trust Eco Fund  Investment Climate Programme; 7. Renewable energy, energy efficiency, energy security programmes financed by the European Economic Area Financial Mechanism 20142021