3.5 Research, innovation and competitiveness dimension i. Policy measures related to the elements set out in point 2.5.3 support the adoption of new technologies with a view to achieving overall energy cost savings, introducing new energy efficiency standards and enabling the transition to lower and more sustainable energy consumption in Bulgaria. In connection with this, the Innovation Strategy for Smart Specialisation 20142020 identifies as a priority area the development of clean technologies with a focus on transport and energy (energy storage, energy saving and efficient distribution, electrical vehicles and eco-mobility, hydrogen-based models and technologies, waste-free technologies, technologies and methods that include the use of by-products and materials from one production in other productions). With a view to achieving these goals, the Ministry of Economy has launched a process of preparation of the Innovation Strategy for Smart Specialisation 20212027, along with an Action Plan to it.   Over the last decade research and innovation have evolved into a key policy priority for the EU. Bulgaria therefore considers research and innovation as a genuine opportunity to improve the competitiveness of the national economy, transforming them into a driver for economic growth and job creation. The to promote:   the deployment of highly efficient energy technologies;  the deployment of smart grids and energy storage technologies;  research in the area of nuclear technology;  research into the possibilities to deploy electrochemical power sources, such as rechargeable batteries, hydrogen and fuel cell technologies. With a view to implementing innovation policy, the following measures will be taken:  increasing the number of innovative start-ups (innovation implementation and development) in high-tech and intensive sectors in line with the Strategy for Smart Specialisation;   increasing the competitiveness and effectiveness of research by placing an emphasis on results and providing incentives (such as better working   163  conditions, international co-operation and mobility, co-operation with business) with a view to attracting high-skilled research teams;  Developing skills at the level of universities and research institutions that enhance the commercial viability and market importance of their research projects and ability to participate in research consortiums;  Support for co-operation between research organisations and businesses, technology transfer and exploitation of research results;  Promoting business investments in research and the deployment of innovation in the form of industrial and household applications; A pilot project for a hydrogen plant with total installed capacity of 20 MW will be developed. On the basis of project results an analysis of the further development of hydrogen power plants after 2030 will be conducted. In addition, Bulgaria intends to participate in the following research and development initiatives:   CROSSBOW  Cross-border management of variable renewable energies and storage units enabling greater flexibility of the energy system as regards the production of renewable energy;  FLEXITRANSTORE  an Integrated Platform for increased flexibility in smart transmission grids with storage entities and large penetration of renewable energy sources, which will increase flexibility on the internal energy market;  INTERRFACE  Consumer interface architecture to provide innovative grid services for an efficient power system thereby increasing flexibility on the internal energy market;  SDN-microSENSE-SDN  microgrid resilient electrical energy system, a project aiming to enhance security on the internal energy market;  FORESIGHT  Advanced cyber-security simulation platform for preparedness training in aviation, naval and power-grid environments aiming to enhance security on the internal energy market;  X-FLEX  Integrated energy solutions and new market mechanisms for an extended flexibility of the European grid;  FARCROSS  Facilitating regional cross-border electricity transmission through innovation, extending IEM system flexibility, facilitating regional cooperation and enhancing system security;  TRINITY  Increasing transmission capacity across regional borders through smart market technologies, extending IEM system flexibility to expand regional co-operation;  Financial compensation mechanism to support the competitiveness of industries at risk, aiming to reduce the harmful emissions they release;    164   National research programmes of the Ministry of Education and Science  Low-carbon economy for transport and life (EPLUS) and Environmental protection and lowering the risk of adverse events and natural disasters, aiming to generate know-how with a focus on the storage and conversion of renewable energy, hydrogen-based technologies and eco-mobility, conducting fundamental and applied research. The programmes will be implemented over a period of 3 to 5 years. In the coming years, the government will focus its efforts on the implementation of new energy saving technologies with a significant contribution to lowering carbon emissions in the air, combating the greenhouse effect and preventing buildings from overheating. The use of advanced innovative technologies with a potential to significantly reduce the penetration of ultraviolet and infrared radiation with a harmful impact on human health into buildings through glass surfaces will be stimulated. The aim is to significantly reduce energy costs ensuring a relatively rapid return on investment with a view to improving the living and working environment for Bulgarian citizens. The low-carbon economy will have a major contribution to achieving the target for the lowering noxious substances released in the atmosphere. In connection with this, steps will be taken to lower the noxious atmospheric emissions from transport, agriculture and the industry. For this purpose, innovative air aspiration and filtering systems will be implemented that conform to the highest EU requirements for the capture of more than 90 % of noxious gases, steam and particulate emissions released during energy production, metal production and processing, inert material excavation and processing (cement, lime, asphalt, marble etc.), the pharmaceutical industry, the chemical industry (acid gases, hydrogen sulphide, hydrogen cyanide, hydrochloric acid, etc.), the food industry (NOx, carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, etc.). Technologies and innovative products, varying from portable industrial units for temporary suction of pollutants from the air to centralised systems for large sectors and manufacturing operations may also be used. The Bulgarian government will support the deployment in working environments of energy saving innovations and solutions that reduce the harmful emissions of particular matter released into the atmosphere in order to ensure healthier and safer living and working conditions for citizens. Options for the use electrochemical sources of power, such as chargeable batteries, hydrogen energy and fuel elements will continue to be explored. ii. Where applicable, cooperation with other Member States in this area, including, where appropriate, information on how the SET plan objectives and policies are being translated to a national context In view of the importance of innovations for the future development of a clean and highly efficient energy sector, the attention and efforts of the Bulgarian government will be focused on the implementation of projects for the deployment of innovations in energy sector in line with the Strategic Energy Technology Plan for Europe. Changes to the overall energy sector model are currently deliberated, including the penetration of smart   165  grids, energy storage systems and highly efficient energy technologies and systems in the economy and daily life with a view to lowering energy costs for consumers. The passive design of a green living environment will require a branch new approach, including finding a balance between building orientation, glass elements in construction, ventilation systems and the implementation of highly efficient insulation technologies, systems and materials. The implementation of advanced highly efficient technologies and new generation systems for buildings and glass panelling will significantly lower energy costs for final consumers and contribute to finding solutions to the challenge of decarbonisation while improving living and working conditions. In order to promote the cost-effective development of low-carbon technologies in Bulgaria, the government will also rely on the SET Plan developed at EU level, which promotes cross-sector co-operation on innovation, and on the European Innovation Fund. iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds Bulgaria finances public research institutions on the basis of effectiveness criteria and has developed national research programmes with the aim of consolidating research potential  total public investment. In the multi-annual financial framework for the period 20142020, the financial envelope from the EU Structural and Investment Funds earmarked as support intended to help Bulgaria address reform challenges is in the amount of EUR 11.7 billion or approximately 2.8 institutions, innovative companies and researchers have received grants from other sources and EU programmes, such as the Horizon 2020 Programme. Their currently stands at approximately EUR 65 million EU financing helps companies and research institutions mobilise additional private investments. Grant assistance from the European Regional Development Fund alone has generated approximately EUR 113 million in additional private capital for companies. A total of 5.2 % of the financing available under the European Regional Development Fund has been earmarked for RD&I and SMEs, entrepreneurship, energy efficiency, urban development and environmental management. These funds will help raise an additional EUR 247 million in public and private investment. Six infrastructure and innovation projects in which Bulgaria will participate have been approved to date. Their total amount is EUR 302 million, which in turn is expected to generate EUR 769 million in investments.  The energy and energy efficiency infrastructure projects are financed under an 20142020. For this purpose, grant assistance in the amount of BGN 76.2 million was provided for the construction of the GreeceBulgaria interconnector. The implementation of this project will enable the construction of gas transmission infrastructure for the Southern Gas Corridor and ensure the security of gas supply for Bulgaria by enhancing transit capacity to the countries of South East Europe. This will help diversify imported gas through additional sources of supply from the Caspian region, the Middle East and the Eastern Mediterranean. 