  89  2.5 Research, innovation and competitiveness dimension i. National objectives and funding targets for public and, where available, private research and innovation relating to the Energy Union, including, where appropriate, a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met There is a clear need for the implementation of the latest energy technologies. Bulgaria aims to accelerate this process in order to speed up transition to clean and highly efficient energy technologies. This is one of the mechanisms for achieving a secure, sustainable, environmentally friendly and highly efficient energy sector. The implementation of new technologies will contribute to lowering technological losses in existing networks, expand the energy market, contribute to finding solutions to the challenges of decarbonisation, lower energy costs for consumers and reduce harmful emissions, thereby improving quality of life for citizens.  In connection with this, the goals of the Bulgarian government in the area of research, innovation and competitiveness are as follows:  achievement of the targets set in the 2030 Climate and Energy Package and development of a low-carbon economy in the long run;  achievement of the Energy Union targets for increased security of energy supply and improved energy and resource efficiency in transport;  promotion of the development of innovations, their subsequent commercialisation and the technological renewal of enterprises;  support for local industries for the introduction of low-carbon technologies and for the public administration and household sectors for the use of new highly efficient energy-saving technologies;  improvement of ambient air quality;  introduction of new energy-saving technologies that improve the quality of life and working conditions of Bulgarians;  introduction of new insulating materials for glass surfaces;  building smart grids for automated electricity system control to be used by both energy suppliers and consumers with a view to ensuring the highest possible standard of electricity supply to consumers and utilising to the maximum extent possible energy from renewable sources. The ultimate goal is to upgrade and automate existing electricity systems.  construction of storage facilities;  support for research and innovation in the area of nuclear energy and sustainable and safe management of nuclear waste;   90   enhancing the competitiveness and market positions of Bulgarian industry and promoting the development and manufacturing of innovative products with high added value;  preserving the competitiveness of basic energy-intensive industries and   developing electric cars and hydrogen technologies;  ii. Where available, national 2050 objectives related to the promotion of clean energy technologies and, where appropriate, national objectives, including long-term targets (2050) for deployment of low-carbon technologies, including for decarbonising energy and carbon-intensive industrial sectors and, where applicable, for related CO2 transport and storage infrastructure. There are no national targets in this area iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to competitiveness Not applicable  3. POLICY MEASURES