2.3 Energy security dimension i. The elements set out in Article 4(c) Energy diversification solutions in Europe and ensuring energy security through solidarity and co-operation between Member States, enhanced diversification of EU energy supply and development and use of indigenous energy resources are key EU priorities for the energy sector. The main goal is to ensure the security of energy supply or, in other words, to guarantee uninterrupted and adequate energy supply from all sources for all consumers. In view of the above, Bulgaria has set energy security objectives for:   diversification of the supply of energy resources;  increasing the flexibility of the national energy system;   addressing constrained or disrupted supply of energy sources for the purpose of enhancing the resilience of regional and national energy systems; and   improving interconnectivity and information security (cybersecurity). ii. National objectives with regard to the diversification of energy sources and supply from third countries for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems Increasing diversification of the sources of natural gas supply through interconnectors with neighbouring countries and supply:  from the Caspian Region via the Southern Gas Corridor;  of liquefied natural gas from the Mediterranean region and other countries via an LNG terminal. The development of local extraction of natural gas through the exploration of new oil and natural gas deposits, including in the deep-water section of the Black Sea will also contribute to diversification. The aim of diversifying the supply of fresh nuclear fuel is to guarantee the uninterrupted operation of the nuclear plant and the safety and reliability of electricity generation.    71  utilising the potential of renewable energy sources as an indigenous resource that helps reduce dependence on imports, improves the security of energy supply and alleviates environmental protection obligations. In 2030, solid fossil fuels are projected to have a share of 36.3 % in primary energy production. Nuclear power, which is considered a local energy source, will play an even more important role, with a share of 35.1 % in primary energy production in 2030. Bulgaria also aims to diversify its energy sources in order to increase the use of renewables, with biomass, solar power and wind power projected to increase up to, respectively, 17.1 %, 3.8 % and up to 1.5 % by 2030.  Figure 14: Primary energy production, WAM scenario (GWh)  Solid fuels Nuclear fuel Wind power Oil and petroleum products Hydropower Solar and other types of energy Natural gas Biomass Geothermal power Source: (B)EST model, E3-Modelling  iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to reducing dependence on imports from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems The diversification of the sources and routes for supply of natural gas will enhance the resilience of the national energy system. In connection with this, Bulgaria will implement a number of projects of common interest for the European Union.  It strives to maintain a low level of dependence on the import of energy resources. Current projections indicate that dependence on imported energy resources in 2030 will be at a level similar to that in 2020.     72  Figure 15: Dependence on imports, WAM scenario  Source: (B)EST model, E3-Modelling  Figure 16: Net import, WAM scenario (GWh)   Solid fuels Natural gas Biomass Oil and petroleum products Electricity  Source: (B)EST model, E3-Modelling  iv. National objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular by means of deploying domestic energy sources, demand response and energy storage Objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system:  preserve the key role of indigenous energy resources (coal) and their use in existing production facilities in line with the requirements of the environmental legislation;  preserve the role of nuclear energy which is considered a local energy source;   73   maintain and develop the transmission capacity of the electricity and gas transmission networks;  optimise consumption in the energy system through the development of energy markets;   increase the electricity and natural gas storage capacity by developing the existing storage facilities and by building new storage facilities. Measures supporting the development of energy infrastructure, the integration of electricity from renewable sources in the electricity grid and the wider uptake of smart energy storage systems will be introduced in the period 20212030. The implementation of such measures will enable the full potential of electricity generated from renewable sources to be exploited as they will facilitate its integration in the electricity system. 2.4 Internal energy market dimension 2.4.1 Electricity interconnectivity i. The level of electricity interconnectivity that the Member State aims for in 2030 in consideration of the electricity interconnection target for 2030 of at least 15 %, with a strategy with the level from 2021 onwards defined in close cooperation with affected Member States, taking into account the 2020 interconnection target of 10 % and the following indicators of the urgency of action: 1) Price differential in the wholesale market exceeding an indicative threshold of EUR 2/MWh between Member States, regions or bidding zones; 2) Nominal transmission capacity of interconnectors below 30 % of peak load; 3) Nominal transmission capacity of interconnectors below 30 % of installed renewable generation. Each new interconnector shall be subject to a socioeconomic and environmental cost-benefit analysis and implemented only if the potential benefits outweigh the costs. In accordance with EU law each Member State must achieve an interconnectivity target of least 10 % and 15 % of domestic installed capacity by 2020 and 2030, respectively. The maximum transmission capacity of power lines and network elements must be ensured in line with applicable safety standards for network operation, including the safety standard for emergency situations. In line with applicable EU requirements, Bulgaria has set an electricity system interconnection target of at least 15 %. The target will be achieved through the implementation of projects of common interest and additional initiatives, which are described in detail below. The projections for the period after 2030, i.e. after the power lines referred to in point 2.4.2 have been constructed, are as follows:  14 600 MW  total installed generation capacity of the Bulgarian electricity system