4.4 Dimension energy security  i. Current energy mix, domestic energy resources, import dependency, including relevant risks Electrical Grid The actual responsibility for securing sufficient quantities of electricity lies with several entities, namely:  Suppliers who are obliged to settle their contractual obligations to customers, in particular HEP-Supply as the largest commercial supplier and HEP Elektra as the universal and guaranteed supplier,  HEP-DSO for the procurement of electricity needed to cover losses in the distribution grid,  HOPS for the procurement of electricity needed to cover losses in the transmission grid and the technical works related to the procurement of electricity for balancing the system. The most significant actual responsibility of HOPS regarding the security of supply and self-sufficiency of the system is to maintain a high level of transmission grid availability, i.e. particularly the interconnection lines, and to maintain/increase the NTC value (Net Transfer Capacity) value (permitted programmed cross-border exchanges) at certain borders in order to technically enable the import of lacking quantities of electricity in the power system of the Republic of Croatia. It should be noted that the possibility of importing energy into the Croatian power system does not depend solely on HOPS, but also on other system operators. Available  17 All reports under Article 5 (2) of Directive 2010/31 / EU and Article 6 of Regulation (EU) 244/2012 of 16th January 2012 on the levels of minimum energy performance requirements for buildings and building elements listed are available on the MCPP website: http://mgipu.hr/default.aspx?id=12841 (accessed on: 27th November 2018) 193  NTC can be used by all market participants, not just those who import energy into the Croatian electricity system. For the purpose of assessing self-sufficiency, the reference power balances of the power system in the period 2018-2022 were formed, as well as the power balances for the winter and summer peak loads. It has been assessed that in the reference scenario it will be necessary to import electricity at an annual level of around 7.4 TWh (in the normal hydrological year), and exceptionally in case of occurrence of one disadvantageous event (any event that results in decreased domestic electricity production capacity or increased electricity demand), imports will increase to 9.3 GWh. In the hours of winter and summer peak loads, the import in the reference scenario is estimated at a maximum of 1,176 MWh/h (winter), and 1,638 MWh/h (summer), and in case of occurrence of one disadvantageous event, these values would increase to 1,561 MWh/h (winter) and 1,983 MWh/h (summer). In case of a combination of up to three disadvantageous events or in extreme situations, imports could increase to 11.6 TWh on an annual level, i.e. up to 2,001 MWh/h (winter) and 2,388 MWh/h (summer) on hourly levels. As there are enough production facilities in the broader region according to ENTSO-E data, and given the existing satisfactory liquidity of the electricity stock exchanges in the region, the preliminary conclusion is that the lacking amounts of electricity will need to be procured over the next period through market transactions, whereby the existing NTC values at borders are high enough to support the expected level of imports, and maintaining NTC at a high level is a prerequisite for secure operation of the Croatian power system. An exception to the foregoing conclusion may occur only in case of a serious crisis in the broader European area when, due to the simultaneous threat to sufficiency of the electricity system in several countries, the ability to procure electricity from imports would be limited. Such a scenario has not yet occurred, but a certain, albeit low, likelihood of such an event or a series of simultaneous disadvantageous events should not be ignored. According to the current situation in the electricity exchanges, it is possible to expect intermittent periods of her due to increased consumption (for example, in the case of very cold weather), or temporary unavailability of production facilities (failures, accidents), i.e. their reduced production capacity (calm weather without sun and wind, possible restrictions in gas supply, etc.). In accordance with the requirements of the ENTSO-E and the network rules of the Croatian transmission system, the Croatian Transmission System Operator has adopted a Plan of protection of the electricity system from large disturbances. It is a document with specific technical and organizational measures which need to be taken in order to restore the system from faulty operation or system failure to normal operation, and in total includes:  a way of announcement of a major disturbance,  a way to activate a large disturbance protection plan,  measures and procedures for protection of the electricity system from large disturbances,  plan for underfrequency load shedding of the electricity system, 194   plan for limitation of electricity consumption and emergency load shedding of the electricity system,  plan for reestablishment of the electricity system,  issuing instructions to the authorized person of the transmission system user and the authorized person of the distribution system operator,  informing the operators of neighbouring transmission systems,  mutual reporting and communication with the neighbouring transmission system operators, the authorized users of the transmission grid and the authorized operator of the distribution grid,  guidelines for the re-establishment of the power supply,  reference to working procedures,  reporting major disturbances and  analysis of major disturbances. ii. Projections of development with existing policies and measures at least until 2040 (including for the year 2030) The structure and expected production of primary energy for the Scenario with existing measures are presented in Table 414.  and Figure 4-16. Table 414. Expected primary energy production - Scenario with existing measures   Figure 4-16. Expected primary energy production - Scenario with existing measures Future domestic production of fossil forms of energy (crude oil and natural gas) will depend on the opening and development of new fields. Without additional production, all current fields will cease operations by 2030/2035. 195  The structure and expected total energy consumption (production + import - export) for the Scenario with existing measures are shown in the following table and figure. Table 415. Expected total energy consumption - Scenario with existing measures   Figure 4-17. Expected total energy consumption - Scenario with existing measures According to the Scenario with existing measures, energy consumption remains at current levels and decreases slightly towards the end of the period. Own supply first increases and then declines sharply after 2040, due to a decline in domestic oil and natural gas production.  Figure 4-18. Total energy consumption and own supply (Scenario with existing measures) 