2.4 Dimension internal energy market 2.4.1  Electricity interconnectivity i. Level of electricity interconnectivity With regard to the EU targets related to the desired level of electricity interconnection of at least 15% compared to installed power of power plants in the observed member state by 2030, the transmission system in the territory of the Republic of Croatia already meets and exceeds that target many times over. The same applies if the existing electricity interconnection capacity is compared with the peak load of the system or the installed power of RES in the territory of the Republic of Croatia. Namely, the sum of installed transmission capacities of existing interconnectors/interstate powerlines is about 13,450 MVA, which is 290% in relation to the total installed capacity of power plants of 4,639 MW (at the end of 2016), while compared to the peak system load of about 3,100 MW this amounts to 434%. The total available cross-border capacity for import is estimated at 4,210 MW, while the total cross-border capacity for export is estimated at 3,830 MW, and in relation to the sum of transmission capacity of interconnectors, it is limited by potential congestion in the internal grid in terms of meeting the operational safety criteria.  With regard to further increase of cross-border capacity by 2030, no specific requirements are set. The development of new interconnection projects will be based on technical and economic considerations and based on cost-benefit analysis in accordance with the ENTSO-E methodology. Neighbouring transmission system operators (BiH, Serbia) are interested in the construction of new 400 kV interconnectors to BiH (Lika - Banja Luka) and Serbia (Ernestinovo - Sombor), which are being analysed through the development of a 10-year transmission grid development plan (TYNDP) within the ENTSO-E. 72  With regard to further enhancement of possibilities of existing cross-border capacity exchanges, the aim is to continuously increase the net transmission capacity values at the borders by eliminating congestion/limitations primarily in the internal grid. 2.4.2 Energy transmission infrastructure i. Key electricity and gas transmission infrastructure projects, and, where relevant, modernisation projects, that are necessary for the achievement of objectives and targets under the five dimensions of the Energy Union Strategy Key targets for the electricity transmission infrastructure - maintaining a high reliability of the transmission system and the security of electricity supply of stipulated quality to customers, - accelerated integration of variable RES into the power system, and increased availability of regulatory reserves to balance their production, - timely realization of investment plans, in particular capital investments that enable the integration of RES into the power system, - supporting market transactions in the territory of the state and the region so that the transmission network does not represent a constraint on competitiveness, - revitalization and replacement of old/deteriorated grid units, - increasing the transmission capacity of individual lines planned for revitalization by using high-temperature low-sag conductors (HTLS), and reducing losses in the transmission of electricity, - application of new technologies in transmission, if they are technically and economically justified.  The existing transmission grid and interconnection capacity to neighbouring countries enable the integration of significant installed power of RES. Given the climate characteristics, the region of Dalmatia is particularly suitable for the development of wind and solar power plants, and there is a strong investor interest in the construction of new facilities in the region. At the moment when the installed capacity of wind power plants exceeds around 1,000 MW (the existing wind power plant capacity in the Republic of Croatia is around 600 MW), it will be necessary to upgrade the internal 400 kV grid on the route Konjsko substation (Split) - Melina substation (Rijeka) so that the energy generated from RES could be transmitted to remote consumption areas. The preparations for the construction of this line has begun, and detailed studies are currently being carried out on the necessity of its construction, definition of the route and environmental impact assessment.  In accordance with Regulation (EU) No. 347/2013, a list of projects of common interest of the EU is defined every two years. The current list of projects of common interest, as set out in 73  Annex VII to Regulation (EU) 347/2013 of 23rd November 2017, includes the following groups of projects of common interest related to electricity in the territory of the Republic of Croatia:  SINCRO.GRID (Slovenia, Croatia) - An innovative integration of synergetic, mature technology-based solutions in order to increase the security of operations of the Slovenian and Croatian power systems simultaneously   Key goals for the gas transmission infrastructure The development of the gas storage system is expected, primarily for the purpose of domestic natural gas consumption, but also for the purpose of new delivery projects. The development of the gas storage system encompasses the expansion of the existing underground gas storage facility Okoli (ongoing), the construction and commissioning of a new (peak) construction of a new seasonal gas storage facility in accordance with the capabilities and needs. Energy storage facilities and facilities for receipt, storage and gasification or decompression of liquefied natural gas (LNG) and compressed natural gas (CNG) have an increasingly important role in the European energy infrastructure. Expansion of such infrastructure facilities is an integral part of the functional network infrastructure. The energy infrastructure for gas that needs to be built in order to implement priorities in the area of energy infrastructure of common interest is defined in the 10-year plan for the development of the gas transport system. In accordance with Regulation (EU) 347/2013, a list of projects of common interest of the EU is defined every two years.  ii. Where applicable, main infrastructure projects envisaged other than Projects of Common Interest Major infrastructure projects are  - gas pipelines for the transport of natural gas and biomethane which are part of the network mainly consisting of high pressure gas pipelines, excluding high pressure gas pipelines used for the production or local distribution of natural gas; - underground gas storage facilities; - facilities for receipt, storage and gasification or decompression of LNG and CNG; - all equipment important for protected, secure and efficient operation of the system or enabling a two-way interconnection, including compressor stations, provided that the construction is technically and economically justifiable or enables the fulfilment of supply security obligations and according to the infrastructure standard (N-1 criterion) in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply. 74  2.4.3 Market integration i. National objectives related to other aspects of the internal energy market such as increasing system flexibility, in particular related to the promotion of competitively determined electricity prices in line with relevant sectoral law, market integration and coupling, aimed at increasing the tradeable capacity of existing interconnectors, smart grids, aggregation, demand response, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, and real-time price signals, including a timeframe for when the objectives shall be met Connecting the day-ahead markets at the border between the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Slovenia had significant effects on increasing the liquidity of the Croatian Power Exchange (CROPEX), increasing the possibilities of energy placement and price harmonization. The existing market integration activities should continue with the aim of achieving full integration into the EU internal market, primarily through integration with the Hungarian day-ahead market. The markets of South-Eastern Europe are very significant for Croatia given its good cross-border connectivity and energy availability, but market integration is limited by the level of development of national electricity markets in these countries. Bosnia and Herzegovina does not yet have a power exchange in place, while connecting the day-ahead market with Serbia can be achieved in a relatively short time. The project of connecting day-ahead markets in the WB6 countries is expected to result in full integration of markets in the region by 2025. The second phase of the expansion of the intraday market through the XBID project is expected, which includes the following countries: Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovenia, along with the already operational countries with which they border.  Although the wholesale electricity market in Croatia is fully open, it is characterized by the existence of a dominant electricity producer. It is necessary to increase the number of participants in the wholesale market, especially in the area of electricity generation, in order to increase competitiveness on the supply side.  It is necessary to increase the participation of end customers with their own generation in the electricity market, to ensure flexibility and sufficiency and to consider the possibility of forming capacity markets. It is necessary to enable aggregation of end customers as well as participation of demand response in the electricity market.  Objectives: - Further integration of the electricity market with neighbouring markets and the EU market 75  - Strengthening the competitiveness and liquidity of the wholesale market by increasing the number of market participants and the share of stock trading ii. Where applicable, national objectives related to the non-discriminatory participation of renewable energy, demand response and storage, including via aggregation, in all energy markets, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met In the segment of ancillary services and system balancing, it is necessary to establish market mechanisms that will enable more market participants, as well as end consumers, to provide such services. Objective: To develop a competitive market for balancing and ancillary services iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to ensuring that consumers participate in the energy system and benefit from self-generation and new technologies, including smart meters Analytical backgrounds developed for the purposes of adopting the Energy Development Strategy ([2], [4]) define the introduction of advanced metering systems by 2025 as priorities for investment in the distribution system. Also, pilot projects for advanced grids are envisaged, on the basis of which additional insights will be gained into the characteristics of grid users and possibilities of their active participation in the power system will be explored. iv. National objectives with regard to ensuring electricity system adequacy, as well as for the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met With regard to the future adequacy of the power system, it is necessary to take into account the expected changes in the power system. According to the estimates of the share of RES in Chapter 2.1.2, it is necessary to secure appropriate investments in the transmission network and the management system, and sufficient (available) possibilities of system balancing, in order to ensure the satisfactory adequacy of the power system and to support the expected flexibility of its operation. Active participation of users in providing services to system operators will also contribute to the flexibility of the power system. It is necessary to prepare the analysis of the impact of climate change on the adequacy of the power system, which may be reduced due to the failure of key production and transmission facilities caused by extreme weather, as a result of a decrease in electricity production from hydroelectric power plants due to a reduction in the amount of water available and as a result of limited operation of thermal power plants due to a decreased availability of the cooling medium of a reduced flow. Given the existing capacities of cross-border lines, it is expected that cross-border exchange of electricity will contribute significantly to the adequacy of the power system in the context of 76  growing intermittent production from RES. It will be necessary to further strengthen the cross-border and regional cooperation between electricity transmission system operators in order to ensure the quality and security of the system's operation. v. Where applicable, national objectives to protect energy consumers and improve the competitiveness of the retail energy sector The rate of supplier switch by end customers is one of the key indicators of the development of the retail electricity market. The rate of supplier switch by end customers from the category of entrepreneurship is significantly affected by the legislative framework regulating public procurement, whereby particular end customers are required to regularly issue tenders for the selection of the most favourable electricity supplier. The Croatian goal in terms of improving competitiveness in the retail electricity market is to expand the choice of suppliers (reduction of the HHI index for metering points from the household and entrepreneurship categories) and the number of products. 2.4.4  Energy poverty  i. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to energy poverty, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met Before the start of the implementation of the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan, the Programme for Elimination of Energy Poverty will be prepared, within the framework of which a model of support to affected households will be developed. The implementation of the Programme for Capacity Building for Eliminating Energy Poverty, in accordance with the 4th National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for the period until the end of 2019, will also start before the implementation of this Plan. It should be noted that the MCPP has so far developed two Programmes that took into account energy poverty: "Programme for the Elimination of Energy Poverty involving the use of renewable energy sources in residential buildings in assisted areas and areas of special state concern for the period 2019-2021", which was developed in collaboration with the State Office for Reconstruction and Housing and "Amendments to the Programme of Energy Renovation of Family Houses for the period 2014-2020 with a detailed plan for the period 2014-2016", which will for the first time include measures for elimination of energy poverty, so that the co-financing rate for this group of citizens would be 100%. In addition to these programmes, under the Building Act, the Government of the Republic of Croatia, upon the proposal of the MCPP, will adopt a Long-Term Strategy for the Renovation of the National Building Stock by 2050, which will propose national measures to alleviate energy poverty, which will be achieved through deep renovation of buildings. Furthermore, in the period from 2021 to 2030, measures to eliminate energy poverty will be implemented under the Programme for Elimination of Energy Poverty, with the following goals:  to provide energy consulting for all energy-poor citizens of the Republic of Croatia, 77   to establish a system of measuring and monitoring energy poverty indicators at the national level and  to establish a system of increasing energy efficiency at the level of energy-poor households and households at risk of energy poverty. The list of priorities for the implementation of technical measures, the degree of co-financing and sources of funding will be elaborated in the Programme for Elimination of Energy Poverty, whose preparation is foreseen in the 4th National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for the period until the end of 2019. The plan for the use of funds obtained from the sale of emission allowances through auctions in the Republic of Croatia for the period until 2020 (OG No. 19/18, OG No. 84/2019) includes co-financing of measures to eliminate energy poverty