212  4.6 Dimension research, innovation and competitiveness i. Current situation of the low-carbon-technologies sector and, to the extent possible, its position on the global market The area of low-carbon technologies is related, by thematic priority, to the area of energy and environment of the Smart Specialization Strategy of the Republic of Croatia for the period 2016 to 2020 [8]. Within this area, there is a possibility of significant contribution to global challenges in relation to safe, clean and efficient energy, climate change and resource efficiency.  Within this area, the following advantages have been identified: - industrial capacities related to the electrical equipment for power system (e.g. voltage and distribution transformers, rotary machines, wind turbines, photovoltaic panels) and the accompanying industry for building large structures of metal and concrete (shipyards), - the tradition and experience in the design and construction of power plants, transmission lines, substations and control systems with very good global export potential, - the presence of natural resources suitable for the production of energy from renewable sources (water resources - construction and equipment of hydropower plants, biogas plants that can take over residues from the Croatian agricultural sector, wind that can be used for further technological upgrades and investments in wind power plants and similar), - a number of educational institutions and university programmes where students are educated in the area of production, engineering and maintenance, - a certain number of public and private research organizations with proven capabilities in this area that can support and enhance the competitiveness of industry through research and development, - the existing market requiring upgrade and expansion of production capacities. Within the area, two sub-thematic priority areas have been defined, namely: - energy technologies, systems and equipment, - ecologically acceptable technologies, equipment and advanced materials. Research is needed within the following topics:  development of models, methods of integral carbon control, improved calculations of emissions/sinks, emission/sink estimates, application of calculations using the overall lifecycle method,  research of technologies, technical and non-technical measures to reduce emissions and increase sinks in all sectors (energy, transport, agriculture, forestry, waste management, and industrial processes)  exploration of possibilities for use, storage, transportation and geological storage of CO2   research on links between mitigation of climate change and adaptation to climate change and interaction with other environmental constituents 213   development of integral models of impact assessment of policies and measures to mitigate climate change on the economy, environment and society   research on sociological aspects of climate change, development of models and methods of raising visibility and public awareness of climate change  research into the potential of biomass, biomass production, biomass utilization and related socio-economic aspects   exploring the potential of all renewable energy sources, the costs and benefits of their use, their impact on the environment, nature and Natura2000  study of integrated solutions, energy efficiency, renewable energy sources across sectors, optimization models for smart cities, green cities and urban infrastructure  research of advanced grids and smart systems  developing concepts and planning for smart cities  research related to the construction of a circular economy, the introduction of a system for the management and utilization of resources, energy and carbon footprint management system  research into sustainable urban mobility, cooperative, intelligent and automated transport solutions  research into the possibilities of increasing carbon sequestration on forestry and agricultural land and possible innovative measures in animal husbandry. Major technological advances are expected in the application of ICT technologies in all sectors, with particularly great impact in energy and transport sectors. The development of energy storage systems, electric vehicle and battery infrastructure, autonomous systems in various sectors and robotics will play a decisive role. Croatian Bureau of Statistics collects data on the foreign trade of the Republic of Croatia, and publishes the aggregated data according to the national classification of activities and by sectors. Currently, there is monitoring of exports of all products under the nomenclature under Regulation 2017/1925 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, but specific low-carbon products need to be defined and reported on separately. ii. Current level of public and private research and innovation spending on low-carbon technologies, current number of patents and current number of researchers According to the estimate for 2017, Gross Domestic Expenditure on Research and Development (GDERD) amounted to 0.86% of GDP. By 2020, the target of 1.4% of shares in GDP was set while the target at the EU level is 3%, which indicates that the Republic of Croatia lags behind in terms of financing research, development and innovation compared to the EU average. In 2017, the share of public expenditure on research and development in GDP during 2017 was 0.43%, while the EU average was 0.69%. During 2017, the share of expenditure by private companies in GDP was also 0.43%, while the EU average was 1.36%.  The Croatian Bureau of Statistics monitors gross domestic expenditure on R&D by sectors and fields of science, as shown in Figure 4-31. [ 22 ]. 214   Figure 4-31. Gross domestic expenditure on R&D by sectors and fields of science  Croatian Bureau of Statistics also monitors R&D expenditures by area of science and research of the R&D project and types of research, as shown in Figure 4-31. [ 22].  Figure 4-32. Gross domestic expenditure on R&D by sectors and fields of science  Within the data on the basis of which the Croatian Bureau of Statistics publishes this aggregated data, it will be necessary to identify and separately report on the R&D areas relevant to low-carbon development. In 2018 the number of patent applications submitted to the State Intellectual Property Office (hereinafter referred to as: SIPO) amounted to 136, out of which 121 were filed by resident and 15 by non-resident applicants. Out of the total number of resident applicants, 84.3% were natural persons and 15.7% legal entities, while, concerning the non-resident applicants, natural persons submitted 60.0% of applications and legal entities 40.0%. Given the number of applications in the period from 2013 to 2018, there is a noticeable decrease in patent 215  applications (in the order 253, 200, 186, 188, 159, 136), which indicates a decrease in patent activity in the Republic of Croatia.  The number of patents according to the International Patent Classification is monitored, as shown in Figure 4-33. [23].   Figure 4-33. Applied and granted patents in the national procedure in 2018 In 2018, the total number of patents granted in the national procedure amounted to 71, out of which there were 57 patents of resident and 14 of non-resident applicants. Out of the total number of patents granted in the national procedure, 84.2% were those invented by natural persons and 15.8% those invented by legal entities.  In the field of technology, the highest share of granted patents in 2018 related to chemistry (47.5%) and mechanical engineering (27.1%), while the lowest one was related to electrical engineering and instruments (both with 5.6%).. In order to track innovations relevant to the low carbon transition, it will be necessary to identify relevant areas and report on them separately. Out of the total number of patent applications of resident applicants in 2018, 64.5% were filed by applicants from Continental Croatia and 35.5% by applicants from Adriatic Croatia. Patent statistics provide information on the success of research, development and innovation activities in selected areas of technology. The number of patents is one measure of the ability to discover new opportunities and activities within the country, and translate knowledge into potential economic benefits. iii. Breakdown of current price elements that make up the main three price components (energy, network, taxes/levies) Electricity The structure of the price of electricity consists of the market part and the regulated part (Figure 4-34). The regulated part is prescribed by law and is the same for all suppliers. It applies to charges for the use of the transmission and distribution grid, the fee for renewable energy 216  sources and high-efficiency cogeneration, the compensation for vulnerable customers (paid only by customers in the household category) and other excise duties. The market share of the price of electricity varies from supplier to supplier and is defined by the electricity supply contract.  Figure 4-34. Retail electricity price structure Source: HEP Opskrba All end customers of electricity in Croatia have the right to choose their supplier and negotiate the price of electricity with them. The price of electricity in the Republic of Croatia varies depending on the supplier the end customer chooses. The electricity supplied is calculated according to three tariffs:  a higher daily tariff (HT), calculated daily from 7 am to 9 pm in the winter time period and from 8 am to 10 pm in the summer time period;  a lower daily rate (LT) calculated in the remaining time;  the unique daily tariff item (UT) lasts between 0 and 24 h every day. Figure 4-35. shows the structure of the total electricity price for end customers in the Republic of Croatia according to EUROSTAT consumption classes in 2017, where:  If - very large industry with a consumption of 100,000 MWh / year, a peak load of 15 MW and a 60/40 day / night consumption ratio (tariff system Businesses - HV) 217   Ie - large industry with consumption of 24,000 MWh / year, peak load of 4 MW and 60/40 day / night consumption ratio (tariff system Businesses - SN 35 kV)  id - medium-sized industry with consumption of 2,000 MWh / year, peak load of 0,50 MW and day / night 65/35 consumption ratio (tariff system Businesses - MV 10 kV)  Ib - medium-sized enterprises with consumption of 150 MWh / year, peak load of 0.05 MW and day/night 70/30 consumption ratio (tariff system Businesses - LV red)  Dc - Medium households with consumption of 3.5 MWh / yr. and day / night 70/30 consumption ratio (tariff system Household white).  Figure 4-35. Structure of the total electricity price for end customers in the Republic of Croatia according to EUROSTAT consumption classes in 2017 Source: CERA Pursuant to the Act on Amendments to the Value Added Tax Act (OG 115/16), from 1st January 2017 the new, reduced, value added tax (VAT) rate for the supply of electricity, including fees associated with that delivery, is applied. The current 25% VAT rate, which was valid until 31st December 2016, has changed to the 13% rate, which is valid from 1st January 2017.  Gas The basic elements of the price of gas are the supply price and the price of gas transmission, the price of gas storage, the price of gas supply and the price of gas distribution. Transport, distribution and the public service of gas supply and guaranteed supply, as well as gas storage are regulated by the respective Methodology of determining the amount of tariff items and the Decision on the amount of tariff items issued by CERA.  The Methodology of determining the price of non-standard services for gas transmission, gas distribution, gas storage, acceptance and shipment of LNG and public service of gas supply regulates the price structure of non-standard services of regulated activities. 218  In accordance with the Methodology of determining the price of balancing energy of the gas system, the gas market operator daily determines the price of positive and negative balancing energy of the gas system. Wholesale procurement price for public service and guaranteed gas supply The price of gas procurement, when performed as a public service and a guaranteed gas supply, is determined according to the Methodology of determining the amount of tariff items for the public service of gas supply and guaranteed supply. It is called the gas reference price and represents the highest price at which a wholesale market supplier can sell gas to suppliers in a public service obligation, and is determined as the sum of the gas procurement price and the premium, i.e. the fixed part of the gas reference price. The price of acceptance and shipment of liquefied natural gas Tariffs for acceptance and dispatch of LNG are determined by the Methodology of determining the amount of tariff items for acceptance and dispatch of LNG, adopted by CERA. For calculation of tariff items for acceptance and dispatch of LNG, the model of the regulatory account for the regulatory period of 20 years from the year of commencement of operation of the LNG terminal will be used, in which the tariff remains unchanged. Cost of gas transmission The price of gas transmission is determined on the basis of the Methodology of determining the amount of tariff items for gas transmission and the Decision on the amount of tariff items for gas transmission. The price of gas transmission is expressed through a fee for the usage of the transmission system. The amount of the fee is determined and paid according to the total contracted capacity of the transmission system of each individual user for each month, including transactions on the secondary market and according to the measured quantities of transmitted gas for each user of the transmission system, and the exceedances calculated for each connection, for each gas day, for each user. Capacity can be contracted on an annual, quarterly, monthly, daily and intraday basis.  Gas storage price The working volume of one Standard Bundled Unit (SBU) is set at 50 GWh, and users lease the service of the standard bundled unit on an annual/multi-year basis. Gas storage fees are defined by the Decision on the amount tariff items for gas storage (OG 122/16) issued by CERA on the basis of the Methodology of determining the amount tariff items for gas storage.  Cost of gas supply for public service of gas supply and guaranteed supply 219  Tariff items for gas supply are determined by the Methodology of determining the amount of tariff items for the public service of gas supply and guaranteed supply. The final price of gas supply consists of the tariff item for the amount of gas delivered (Ts1) and a fixed monthly fee (Ts2). The amounts of tariff items for the public service of gas supply for suppliers in the public service obligation are determined by the Decision on the amount of tariff items for the public service of gas supply. Gas distribution price Tariff items for gas distribution for the regulatory period 2018 - 2021 are defined by the Decision on the amount of tariff items for gas distribution, which states the amounts of tariff items for gas distribution for energy operator. The final price of gas distribution consists of the tariff item for the amount of distributed gas (Ts1) and a fixed monthly fee (Ts2). Tariff items Ts1 are defined for each individual distributor in 12 tariff models (TM) depending on annual consumption, while tariff items Ts2 are prescribed in the same amount for all distributors.  Gas selling prices The average selling price of gas without VAT for end customers using the distribution system in the Republic of Croatia in 2017 was HRK 0.2335/kWh, which is 16% less than in 2016. The average selling price of gas without VAT in the Republic of Croatia in 2017 for end customers using the transmission system was HRK 0.1805 /kWh, which is 1% more than in 2016, having in mind that the price was at its lowest in the second quarter when it was HRK 0.1673/kWh, and the highest in the first quarter when it was HRK 0.1943/kWh. iv. Description of energy subsidies, including for fossil fuels In the Republic of Croatia, a system to encourage the use of renewable energy sources for the production of electricity was introduced in 2007. RES electricity producers received FITs for the kilowatt-hour of electricity produced, depending on the renewable energy source used and technology, in accordance with the Tariff System for the production of electricity from renewable energy sources and cogeneration (Official Gazette 33/07, 63 / 12, 121/12, 144/12, 133/13, 151/13, 20/14, 107/14, 100/15), where the subsidy is equal to the difference between the FIT and the market price of electricity. Plants for which a FIT contract has been concluded will continue to receive the contract price for the duration of the contract (12 years for contracts concluded until 2013, i.e. 14 years for contracts concluded after 2013). Since 2016, the Act on Renewable Energy Sources and High-efficiency Cogeneration has come into force, which envisaged the so-called premium system as part of an incentive framework. Since the by-laws have not yet been fully elaborated and adopted, no subsidies have been paid under this Act. Another type of energy subsidies in the Republic of Croatia is excise duty exemptions, as prescribed by the Excise Duty Act. Excise duty exemptions are provided for unleaded motor 220  gasoline and blue dyed diesel for agricultural, fishing, aquaculture and navigation purposes. Beneficiaries of this right exercise this right under special regulations on the basis of a permit and a fuel card issued by the authority competent for agriculture and fisheries, or the authority competent for agriculture and fisheries, or the authority competent for maritime affairs. Each beneficiary is assigned a corresponding approved annual quantity of blue dyed diesel for dedicated consumption - a quota.  In addition, the same law provides for the use of energy products and electricity for non-excise purposes, such as:  energy generating products used as motor fuel n air transport (excluding private flights),  energy generating products used as motor fuel for navigation, including fishing and electricity produced on board (excluding the use of crafts and vessels for private purposes),  energy generating products used by the energy generating products and electricity producer in their production facilities for the further processing or production of other energy generating products and electricity (unless used as motor fuel for vehicles),   energy generating products used for the joint production of heat and electricity in a single process (cogeneration),   energy generating products used in mineralogical processes,   in cases of dual use of energy generating products - if used as a heating fuel and simultaneously for purposes other than propulsion or heating (use of energy generating products for chemical reduction, in electrolytic and metallurgical processes),   energy generating products used for purposes other than motor or heating fuel; and  natural gas used in households and natural gas used as motor fuel for vehicles and in other specific cases described in the law. The same Act provides for the possibility of reimbursement of excise duty on diesel used in the commercial transport of goods and passengers purchased in forms of non-cash payment in the Republic of Croatia, for persons registered for the commercial transport of goods and passengers established in the European Union. The excise duty refund is determined in the amount of the difference between the excise duty valid on the day of purchase of diesel fuel in the Republic of Croatia and the minimum prescribed excise duty on diesel fuel, amounting to EUR 330, which is then converted into the national currency. Beneficiaries of the right to refund are obliged to enter in the register of beneficiaries of the right to refund of excise duty on diesel fuel in the commercial transport of goods and passengers. The purpose of this type of refund is to reduce the cost of domestic carriers and increase their competitiveness in the European market. 221   Figure 4-36. Financial support to fossil fuels in the EU (EC, Trinomics) It can be concluded that most energy subsidies are aimed at increasing energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources, which will continue in the future, while respecting state aid restrictions. A smaller part of energy subsidies is related to exemption from excise duties in transport and agriculture, the abolition of which is currently not planned.   