196  4.5 Dimension internal energy market 4.5.1 Electricity interconnectivity  i. Current interconnection level and main interconnectors  The Croatian electricity system is connected with 400 kV, 220 kV and 110 kV voltage levels to the systems of neighbouring countries. With 400 kV transmission lines (a total of seven transmission lines of which three are double and four are single), the Croatian electricity system is connected to the following systems:  Bosnia and Herzegovina (400 kV transmission line Ernestinovo - Ugljevik and 400 kV transmission line Konjsko - Mostar),   Serbia (400 kV transmission line Ernestinovo - Sremska Mitrovica 2),   - Heviz, 2x400 kV transmission line Ernestinovo - Pecs) and   Slovenia (2x400 kV transmission line Tumbri - -  The interconnectivity between the Croatian system and neighbouring ENTSO-E members is achieved also with eight 220 kV transmission lines. In addition, the Croatian system is connected to the environment at 110 kV level as well (a total of 18 transmission lines in permanent or periodic operation).  The total installed capacity of all interconnectors is 13.450 MVA. Due to the limitations in the internal transmission grids on both sides of the border, maximum possible exchange capacities at individual borders have been defined in order to preserve the secure operation of the electricity system. These NTCs (Net Transfer Capacity) limits are far less than the installed transmission line power (total at 3,000-3,500 MW at all boundaries), but still more than sufficient for large exchanges of electricity with neighbouring systems and to cover loads of the Croatian electricity system (peak load about 3,000 MW). Given that the level of electricity exchange with neighbouring systems is affected by the pronounced dependence of the production portfolio in Croatia on hydrology, the increasing share of wind farms with also very variable production and variable prices in the wholesale electricity markets in the environment, the power of exchange towards neighbours is also highly variable. However, the total exchange with neighbouring systems is still significantly lower than the total capacity of exchange, so the utilization factor of individual interconnectors (the ratio of transmitted energy and the multiplication of time and installed power) varies between 0 and 50%, with an average estimate of 35%. Most interconnectors are under a low load most of the time. In 2018, about 12.7 TWh was entered into the Croatian electricity system, and about 6.5 TWh came out, as shown in the following figure for the period 2016-2018 The largest exchange is performed with the electricity system of Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is expected given the very high level of installed interconnected capacities. With BiH alone, Croatia has as many as 21 interconnectors, and with Slovenia 8 interconnectors. Quantities of 197  electricity exchanged with neighbouring countries (Slovenia, Hungary, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina) in 2016, 2017 and 2018 shown in Figure 4-19.  Figure 4-19. Exchange of electricity with neighbouring countries, 2016, 2017 and 2018 Source: HOPS Good interconnection with neighbouring systems enables significant export, import and transit of electricity through the transmission grid, and places the Republic of Croatia in the position of an important link between the electricity systems of Central and South-eastern Europe. ii. Projections of interconnector expansion requirements (including for the year 2030) By 2030, it is possible to build a new 400 kV transmission line Lika - Banja Luka , which would further connect the Croatian power system to the power system of BiH. Technical-economic analyses of the justifiability of its construction are in preparation. 198  Regarding additional new interconnectors, at the level of ENTSO-E, the possibility and justification of the construction of the following lines are currently analysed:   Tuzla (Bosnia and Herzegovina);   Herzegovina);   Heviz 2 (Hungary);   400 kV transmission line Ernestinovo (Republic of Croatia)  Sombor (Republic of Serbia). Depending on the development of the future electricity market and the integration of RES in the Croatian power system, in the long-term, the construction of these interconnectors is possible: 4.5.4  Energy transmission infrastructure  i. Key characteristics of the existing transmission infrastructure for electricity and gas  The electricity transmission grid on the territory of the Republic of Croatia consists of overhead lines and cables, substations and other high voltage equipment/plants that are in operation under the voltage levels of 400 kV, 220 kV and 110 kV. The transmission grid connects power plants and larger consumer centres, or distribution grid, through several possible directions with the aim of achieving a satisfactory level of security of supply to customers with the electricity of the prescribed quality.  The total length of high voltage overhead lines and cables of the above-mentioned voltage levels is currently around 7,600 km, and the grid contains around 200 substations of 400/220/110 kV, 400/110 kV, 220/110 kV and 110/x kV. The backbone of the transmission grid is 400 kV grid that connects the wider Osijek, Zagreb, Rijeka and Split areas, a significant number of large production facilities is connected to 220 kV grid that connects certain regions within the country, while 110 kV grid connects local areas and serves to supply the distribution grid or large customers directly connected to this voltage level, where part of power plants/generators is connected also to 110 kV grid.  The transmission grid is managed by HOPS d.o.o. that is also responsible for developing the transmission grid, as well as for guiding and managing the entire electricity system. All this is conducted from the National Dispatch Centre (NDC) and four regional management centres. The balancing of the system is also under the management of HOPS, as well as the supply of ancillary services for the system that enable the achievement of equivalent production and electricity consumption within a specific period, or maintenance of the frequency at the prescribed level, as well as cross-border power/energy exchange according to the operational rules of the European transmission system operators (ENTSO-E), maintenance of prescribed voltage conditions in all parts of the grid, or compensation of reactive energy within the system, 199  re-establishment of power supply after major disruptions or system failures, or island power plant operation on electrically isolated areas after major disruptions.   Figure 4-20. Croatian electricity system transmission grid Source: HOPS The transmission grid topology (form) is currently determined in accordance with the actual spatial distribution of electricity consumption, locations of existing power plants, market conditions in Croatia and its surroundings, and the prescribed grid planning and operational management of the system. The transmission grid is designed so that in the event of a single disruption of line, transformer or generator, the transmission of electricity of the prescribed quality will not be prevented in any part of the country. With the existing amounts of basic input parameters that are important for the planning and operation of the transmission grid in the amount of around 3 100 MW of peak load, 17 TWh of electricity consumption per year, annual energy imports of around 7 TWh, transmission for third parties in the amount of up to 7 TWh and connection to the transmission grid of power plants of a total power of around 4 600 MW, the construction of the transmission grid can be considered satisfactory, which is manifested 200  in very rare system disruptions (in the past, only local disruptions of certain parts of the system occurred rarely) and low annual amounts of electricity that was not supplied from the transmission grid (order of magnitude up to 1 GWh). The electricity quality from the transmission grid is currently partially deteriorated due to long-term occurrences of high voltage at all three high-voltage levels, but the project of the installation of compensating plants that would solve this problem is currently being implemented. The frequency is stable, and its usual and extraordinary deviations are within the prescribed limits. The installed transmission capacity of interconnectors is about 15000 MVA, which exceeds the peak load of the electricity system (about 3000 MW) many times over. Figure 4-21. shows the ratios of installed power of interconnectors and the peak load, that is, installed production capacity in European countries. By both of these criteria, Croatia is among the best connected countries in Europe, along with other small systems with relatively low levels of load and installed power of power plants.  Figure 4-21. Installed power of interconnectors and installed power of production in relation to peak load in European countries An unfavourable characteristic of the transmission grid is the relatively high proportion of old plants and grid units, especially the 110 kV and 220 kV voltage levels, which HOPS plans to systematically renew and revitalize in the coming period. Nonetheless, the existing reliability indicators are at a very high level with a relatively low amount of annual electricity losses (below 500 GWh) given the high transits to which the grid is exposed.  In recent years, HOPS registered a negative trend in estimates regarding the security of electricity supply for customers due to insufficient production plants in the territory of the Republic of Croatia caused by market reasons (lack of competitiveness of domestic power plants such as TPP Rijeka, TPP Sisak A and B), or large failures and/or environmental reasons (such as TPP Plomin 1 and TPP CHP Zagreb block C). Therefore, the sufficiency/security of supply for customers increasingly depends on the import of electricity whose capabilities are conditioned by the availability of cross-border transmission capacities and the amounts of 201  those capacities that are made available to market participants and whose values cannot be independently influenced by HOPS. The gas transmission system in the Republic of Croatia is composed of a total of 2,693 km of gas pipelines available to the transmission system operator (PLINACRO). Gas in the gas transmission system is withdrawn through nine connectors at input measuring stations, of which six connectors receive gas from the production fields located on the territory of the Republic of Croatia, two connectors receive gas from import supply routes and one connector serves to withdraw gas from the Okoli underground gas storage facility. The transmission of gas from the transmission system is carried out through 194 connectors at 157 output measuring reduction stations. The gas transmission system of the Republic of Croatia reached a significant level of development regarding capacities and the distribution on almost 95% of the territory of the Republic of Croatia, as well as regarding the connection with gas systems of neighbouring countries, technological reliability and operational safety. The gas transmission system enables gas to be delivered to 19 counties. The gas transmission system of the Republic of Croatia is shown in the figure below.  Figure 4-22. Gas transmission system in the Republic of Croatia Source: PLINACRO In 2017, 32,348 TWh of natural gas was transported through the system, of which 29,149 TWh from inputs of the transmission system to output measuring reduction stations, and the rest of 202  3,199 TWh was transported to the Okoli underground gas storage. During 2017, at the system level, the largest transmission was realized in the amount of 158 GWh/day. ii. Projections of network expansion requirements at least until 2040 (including for the year 2030) Having regard to the expected accelerated integration of RES and projected energy transition with a view to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, the electricity transmission grid development should be determined taking into account the following:  peak load at the level of transmission grid level is planned in the amount of around 2900 MW in 2020 and around 3200 MW in 2030,  as regards possible development scenarios, the construction and connector to 110 kV grid of a new HPP (power of ~36 MW) is planned in 2024, connector to 220 kV grid (400 kV) of another HPP (power of ~380 MW) is planned in 2026, and the construction and connector to 110 kV grid of a new pumped-storage HPP (power of ~150 MW) is planned in 2028,  as regards possible development scenarios, the entry into operation of a new CCGT block of 150 MW in the Zagreb area in 2023 and the construction of new gas blocks/block of 300 MW in 2028 are planned,  construction of a total of 1364 MW - 1634 MW in wind farms, which represents an increase compared to the existing construction of wind farms from 788 MW to 1,058 MW,  construction of a total of 144 MW to 387 MW in solar power plants connected to the transmission grid,  remain in the TPP Plomin 2 until the observed period, and continue to take over the half of  According to the preliminary assessment, the total investment in the transmission grid (including connectors for new conventional power plants, wind farms and solar power plants, as well as other various costs identified in the ten-year development plan of the transmission grid for the period 2018-2027), having regard to the above-described input assumptions, in the period by 2030, would amount to approximately HRK 7.9 to 8.2 billion, and assuming equal annual investments, it would be an investment cost from 666-686 million/year  203   Figure 4-23. Foreseen topology of 400 kV and 220 kV grid on the territory of the Republic of Croatia in 2030  Besides a large part of investments already contained in the official ten-year development plan of the transmission grid for the period 2019-2027, additional grid reinforcements requiring larger investments are the following:  increase of transmission power of 220 kV transmission line Konjsko - - Brinje in the medium-term (approximately by 2023) by replacing ACSR conductors with HTLS conductors, in order to receive the production of wind and solar power plants in the Dalmatia area,  construction of new 400 kV transmission line Konjsko - Lika in the long-term (approximately by 2030) in order to continue with the construction of wind and solar power plants, and extension of 400 kV switchyard Lika foreseen as part of the connector to the HPP grid Senj 2 foreseen in 2026,  construction of (2x)400 kV transmission line Lika - Melina in order to remove possible restrictions in the transmission of production of hydro, wind and solar power plants in the area of Dalmatia and Lika towards the wider Rijeka area, 204   connected to 400 kV and 110 kV grid, through which the energy produced by wind and solar power plants would be transmitted through 400 kV grid in remote areas, in the case where 110 kV grid can no longer take over the entire production of these power plants locations will depend on the locations and powers of new wind and solar power plants foreseen for the connection to the transmission grid)  as regards new interstate/interconnection lines in the period by 2030, the construction of new 400 kV transmission line Lika - Banja Luka is possible if technical-economic analyses demonstrate the justifiability of its construction.  Since HOPS is responsible for the reliability and availability of the electricity supply system, the correct coordination of production, transmission and distribution systems and the operation of the electricity system in a way to ensure the security of electricity supply, in the future, it will have to follow the functioning of the electricity system with an increased level of integration of variable sources of electricity, inform competent institutions in a timely manner in the event of any endangerment of the security of electricity supply and propose possible application of permitted mechanisms to develop production capacities. It is necessary to point out that, pursuant to the Electricity Market Act (OG 22/13, 95/15 and 102/15, 68/18, 52/19), HOPS shall be obliged to produce and adopt, with the prior consent of the Croatian Energy Regulatory Agency, a ten-year, three-year and one-year investment plans for the development of the transmission grid. In order for any investment in the transmission gird to be realized, it must become part of these development plans.  Planning for the development of the gas transport system is carried out through the development of a 10-Year Gas Transmission Grid Development Plan, the development of which is the obligation of the gas transmission system operator. The gas transmission system operator is Plinacro d.o.o. 10-Year Gas Transmission Grid Development Plans are updated annually and approved by CERA. At the time of adoption of this document, the 10-Year Gas Transmission Grid Development Plan of the Republic Croatia 2018-2027 was relevant. The plan will be continuously updated throughout the implementation period of this document. Taking into account the expected trends in the future consumption of natural gas, the expected changes in the seasonal characteristics of consumption and peak loads, the need for new quantities of gas from imports, obligations under EU regulations and the expected development of the gas transmission system in the wider and closer environment, determinants of the future development of the gas transmission system of the Republic of Croatia are:  supply security obligations and according to the infrastructure standard (N-1 criterion) in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply (SOS Regulation),  necessary diversification of supply and increase of efficiency of the transport system,  increasing the internal security of the transmission system and  allowing gas transmission to neighbouring countries. 205  Obligations on security of supply and infrastructure standard: Depending on the expected scenario of changes in gas consumption and the level of domestic production, in order to meet the infrastructure standard, it is necessary to secure a new supply capacity of at least 3.5 million m3 / day in the shortest possible time, and an additional 4-8 million m3 / day should be built around 2030. Strategic projects that meet the obligation under the infrastructure standard are projects that increase capacity at the entrance to the transport system, which can be: LNG terminal on the island of Krk, Ionian--Sotla gas pipeline system interconnected with Slovenia and Slobodnica-Sotin towards Serbia. Transmission gas system for the diversification of supply and the increase of efficiency of the transport system: Almost all gas imports to Croatia come from Russia, and Croatia is at the end of that transmission chain, so gas prices are relatively high. Likewise, the gas system is only used to supply domestic customers with gas. The construction of the LNG terminal, in addition to increasing the diversification of gas supply, will create preconditions for gas transmission to third countries, and indirectly increase the efficiency of the gas transmission system and reduce the average transport tariffs. The same impact will be achieved by building the IAP. It is therefore imperative to increase activities to strengthen the diversification of gas supply by further developing gas supply projects from the Caspian region or the Eastern Mediterranean. It is also necessary to develop all projects that can increase gas transmission through the Croatian gas transmission system and, consequently, increase the efficiency of the gas transmission system of the Republic of Croatia itself more actively. 206   Figure 4-24. Future development of the transmission system and projects in the function of diversification of supply and increase of efficiency of the transmission system  Strategic projects to increase supply diversification and efficiency of the transmission system are the gas pipeline system for the evacuation of gas from the LNG terminals to Hungary, the Ionian--Sotla gas pipeline system to Slovenia and Slobodnica-Sotin for gas transmission to Serbia and potentially supply of Russian gas from TurkStream from Serbia. -Zlobin gas pipeline, which will connect the LNG terminal on the island of Krk to the existing transmission system, will enable the first gas volumes to be transported from the LNG terminal on the island of Krk to the market in Hungary and further in the east of Europe. Further development of the gas pipeline system from Zlobin to Slobodnica near Slavonski Brod (the Zlobin-Bosiljevo-Kozarac-Slobodnica gas pipeline) will increase the shipping capacity towards southeast Europe up to 7 billion m3 of gas annually.  -Zabok-Sutla gas pipeline system will allow gas to be transported from the LNG terminal to Slovenia and further to Central and Western Europe, as well as the access of the terminal users and gas users in the Republic of Croatia to the liquid gas exchange in this part of Europe in Baumgarten, Austria.  The Ionian Adriatic Pipeline (IAP) would allow the supply of gas from the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline to Croatia and countries in the region and possible transport to Hungary, Slovenia and Austria.  207  Gas transmission system for internal operational security of supply: The transmission system that serves as an internal security of supply will provide a more stable and secure supply of those gas-powered areas from gas pipeline branches that have only one power source, and will allow for the creation of internal loops that increase security of supply. Gas transmission system for export: The transmission system in the function of export is referred to as the gas pipeline systems of relatively minor regional influence connecting the gas systems of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Slovenia. - - - Bosanski Brod gas pipeline systems would provide gas to neighbouring BiH, while the Umag - Koper pipeline would allow for the connection of Istria and southern Slovenia. The construction of these pipelines depends primarily on the interest of neighbouring countries and the economic justification for their construction.  All of the above projects are listed in the 10-Year Gas Transmission Grid Development Plan of the Republic Croatia 20182027. The final investment decision is necessary for their realization. 4.5.3 Electricity and gas markets, energy prices i. Current situation of electricity and gas markets, including energy prices  In Croatia, there is the CROPEX power exchange with possibility of day-ahead and intraday trading. In December 2015, CROPEX became NEMO ( Nominated Electricity Market Operator), i.e. an exchange with the right and responsibility to participate in the implementation of day-ahead and intraday market coupling processes at the EU level. Connecting Croatia with the EU market at the day-ahead level should be realized through the IBWT ( Italian Borders Working Table) project, and at the intraday level through the EU XBID ( Cross Border Intra Day) project. In addition to connecting with the EU market, cooperation between CROPEX and the transmission system operator from Bosnia and Herzegovina (NOS BiH) has been initiated on the implementation of the cross-border interconnection of the day-ahead markets of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Furthermore, there is a possibility of connecting to the day-ahead market at the border with Hungary (4M MC), as well as specific initiatives for the development of the regional power exchange in South-eastern Europe based on the Nord Pool exchange model. Since 19th June 2018, the Croatian day-ahead market has been connected to MRC (Multi-Regional Coupling) day-ahead market, i.e. to the uniform European day-ahead market via the Croatian-Slovenian border. The daily cross-border capacity for the Croatian-Slovenian border is allocated indirectly exclusively through the EU's Price Coupling of Regions exchange 208  solution for day-ahead markets, whereby the said border became part of the interconnected Multi-Regional Coupling day-ahead market. Croatian institutions participate and support processes within the Energy Community related to the connection of markets in the WB6 countries.  As the electricity market is completely open, all customers are free to choose their preferred supplier and freely negotiate the price of electricity. Achieved electricity prices for household and business (industry) end customers, according to Eurostat consumption categories, are presented below. Achieved electricity prices for household and business final customers are presented below, according to Eurostat data. Prices shown for household customers include taxes and other fees, while prices for business customers do not include taxes and other fees.  Figure 4-25.: Electricity prices for household end customers in Croatia Source: Eurostat 209   Figure 4-26. Electricity prices for business end customers in Croatia Source: Eurostat By establishing the ECO balance group, CEMO will be obliged to cover the balancing energy costs to the transmission system operator due to the divergences of the hourly electricity production plans from the realized hourly deliveries of the electricity ECO balance group. According to the provisions of the Renewable Energy Sources and High Efficiency Cogeneration Act, CEMO will cover the balancing energy costs of the ECO Balance Group from the funds collected in the system for stimulating the production of electricity from RES and cogeneration, except for the part of the costs that are settled from the monthly fee paid by members of the ECO balance group. The level of balancing energy costs of the ECO balance group depends on the divergence of the hourly EE production plans from the realized hourly deliveries of the EE ECO balance group and is calculated in accordance with the Methodology for determining the prices for the calculation of balancing electricity to entities responsible for the divergence, which is issued by the CERA. Historical prices of natural gas for household and business final customers are presented below, according to Eurostat data. Shown natural gas prices for household customers include value added tax (VAT), while natural gas prices for industrial customers are expressed without VAT. 210   Figure 4-27. Natural gas prices for household customers in Croatia Source: Eurostat  Figure 4-28. Natural gas prices for business customers in Croatia Source: Eurostat ii. Projections of development with existing policies and measures at least until 2040 (including for the year 2030) The estimation of trends of the electricity generation cost for the scenario with existing measures based on the expected development is shown in the following figure. This estimation includes analysed investments in the construction of new power plants, fuel costs and other operating costs of all power plants, as well as the cost of emission allowances. The estimate 211  does not include the annuities of plants that are already in operation. By 2030, a gradual decrease in electricity import is assumed.  Figure 4-29. Electricity generation cost projections   Below is the estimation of natural gas price trends by 2040 [20].  Figure 4-30. Projections of natural gas prices according to the World Energy Outlook 2018   