80  3. POLICIES AND MEASURES 3.1  Dimension decarbonisation 3.1.1   GHG emissions and removals i. Policies and measures to achieve the target set under Regulation (EU) 2018/842 as referred in point 2.1.1 and policies and measures to comply with Regulation (EU) 2018/841, covering all key emitting sectors and sectors for the enhancement of removals, with an outlook to the long-term vision and goal to become a low emission economy and achieving a balance between emissions and removals in accordance with the Paris Agreement Measures are specified for the following sectors significant for greenhouse gas emissions: cross-sectoral measures, industrial processes, waste management, agriculture and LULUCF. Cross-sectoral measures are specified below. MS-1: Committee for intersectoral coordination for policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change Regulatory measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Pursuant to the Air Protection Act (OG Nos. 130/11, 47/14, 61/17, 118/18), the Committee for intersectoral coordination for policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change was established by the Decision of the Government of the Republic of Croatia in 2014 (OG Nos. 114/14, 9/18). The Committee gives recommendations to the Government of the Republic of Croatia on the overall policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change and ensures political support to the implementation of the policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change. The Committee also proposes to the Government of the Republic of Croatia the adoption of strategic planning documents and regulations pertaining to policies and measures for climate change mitigation and adaptation, proposes public policy objectives, measures and activities and monitors their effects and outcomes in implementation, and proposes and supports the promotion of interdisciplinary and synergistic public policy objectives, measures and activities. The composition, tasks and the manner of work of the Committee shall be determined by the Government of the Republic of Croatia at the suggestion of the ministry responsible for the environment. The task of the Committee will be to monitor the implementation of the Integrated Energy and Climate Plan and the achievement of set targets, both in terms of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and other targets by dimensions. Funds needed for implementation: regular work of state bodies 81  Sources of financing: / Executive body: MEE Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: MEE Impact: Indirect contribution to reduction in greenhouse gas emissions Monitoring method: Number of meetings and number and structure of participants Connection to other dimensions: The measure is related to all five dimensions Connection to climate change adaptation: The Committee is also responsible for climate change adaptation. Research and development: Has impact, in the context of monitoring the implementation and achieving goals. MS-2: Supporting the establishment and capacity building of regional energy and climate agencies Organizational and financial measure; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Regional energy agencies do not currently operate on the entire territory of the Republic of Croatia, and capacity building of existing regional energy agencies in the field of climate change and their transformation into energy and climate agencies is needed. The aim of this measure is to encourage the establishment of regional energy agencies for the areas of the Republic of Croatia where they do not operate, and the transformation of existing energy agencies into energy and climate agencies. Funds needed for implementation: approximately HRK 1 million annually for a period of 3 years for the establishment of one regional energy and climate agency Sources of financing: EU funds, funds of regional/local self-government units Executive body: MEE Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: MEE Impact: Establishment of an energy and climate agency and transformation of existing regional energy agencies into regional energy and climate agencies Monitoring method: Number of newly established energy and climate agencies, number of agencies transformed Connection to other dimensions: The measure is related to all five dimensions Connection to climate change adaptation: Regional energy and climate agencies will implement energy and climate change adaptation projects. 82  Research and development: / MS-3: Promoting the use of innovative information and communication technologies (ICTs) to reduce GHG emissions Information measure; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Innovative information and communication technologies play an increasingly important role in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and improving energy efficiency. By intensifying their use in public administration, services and manufacturing processes, work productivity and efficiency will increase, while simultaneously reducing energy consumption and the resulting greenhouse gas emissions. It is expected that the measure will increase the use of innovative ICTs and monitoring of real energy savings as well as reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. MS-4: The EU emissions trading system Regulatory measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: The EU emissions trading system (EU ETS) includes all the activities listed in Annex I to the Regulation on the method of greenhouse gas emissions trading (OG Nos. 69/12, 154/14), and operators of facilities included in the system are responsible for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Through an even allocation of emission allowances, participants in the system from all Member States took on an obligation of reducing emissions for the purposes of contributing to a reduction in emissions by at least 21 % by 2020 and by at least 43% by 2030 compared to 2005 levels. Therefore the reduction in emissions within the framework of the EU ETS is regulated at the EU level. Since 1st January 2013, the Republic of Croatia is integrated into the EU ETS. Operators of facilities in the Republic of Croatia, in accordance with the EU ETS rules, received greenhouse gas emissions permits and established a regime for monitoring emissions and delivering verified reports to the competent authority. The greenhouse gases covered by the EU ETS are: carbon dioxide (CO2) for all activities and additionally for specific activities, nitrous oxide (N2O) and perfluorocarbon (PFC). Additional activity included in the EU ETS is aviation. Aircraft operators in the Republic of Croatia have been included in the EU ETS since 2012 for flights to the EU and since 2014 for flights within the Republic of Croatia. All operators except for electricity producers have submitted their requests for issuing free emission allowances for sale to third parties. Free emission allowances are distributed free of charge to facilities at risk of carbon leakage in third countries, based on benchmarks defined in accordance with the reference value for 10% of the most efficient facilities in the same sector. Operators who will not have enough allowances to cover their greenhouse gas emissions have the option of purchasing emission allowances through auctions or on the secondary ETS market. Activities: The following will be implemented within the framework of the measure:  83   preparations for phase 4 of the greenhouse gas emission allowances trading (2021- 2030) within the framework of the EU ETS, pursuant to Directive (EU) 2018/410 amending Directive 2003/87/EC, for the purposes of implementing a cost-effective reduction in emissions and low-carbon investments;  continuation of activities of EU ETS participants (facility operators and aircraft operators): updating of greenhouse gas emission monitoring plans, preparation of greenhouse gas emission reports, preparation of the verification report, preparation of the improvement report (if necessary), emissions trading at the primary and secondary market, submission of emission allowances, etc.;  activities of ot Funds needed for implementation: mainly funds of facility owners and airlines Sources of financing: / Executive body: MEE Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: MEE Impact: The targeted reduction in greenhouse gas emissions is at least 2.2% per year, by increasing energy efficiency, using renewable energy sources and other measures to reduce emissions (undesirable: reducing production in facilities or reducing the number and length of flights of airlines). Monitoring method: Preparation and verification of GHG emission reports Connection to other dimensions: The use of renewable energy sources (decarbonisation) and the increase of energy efficiency are encouraged, with the aim of reducing greenhouse gas emissions of facilities and airlines included in the EU ETS. Connection to climate change adaptation: When deciding on measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, it is necessary to take into account the impact and adaptation to climate change (it is possible that climate change will make it difficult to implement certain measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions). Research and development: Innovation Fund and Modernization Fund, within the EU ETS, co-finance research and development of emission-free or low-greenhouse gas emission technologies. MS-5: CO2 emission tax for the non-ETS stationary sources Regulatory and fiscal measure; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: The Regulation on unit charges, corrective coefficients and detailed criteria and benchmarks for determining the charge for emissions of carbon dioxide into the environment (OG Nos. 73/07, 48/09, 2/18) stipulates the obligation to 84  pay the CO2 emission tax for all stationary sources emitting more than 30 tons of CO2 annually from 2007 - 2014, or 450 tons of CO2 annually since 2015. The obligated parties investing in energy efficiency, renewable energy sources and other measures to reduce CO 2 emissions and other greenhouse gas emissions pay a lower tax. The Environmental Protection and Energy Efficiency Fund is authorized to calculate and charge the costs. From 2013 onwards, the obligation to pay the CO2 emission charge applies only to non-ETS sources. The Act on Amendments to the Act on the Environmental Protection and Energy Efficiency Fund (OG No. 144/12) stipulates that as of 1st January 2013, legal or natural persons possessing or using at least one source of CO2 emissions for which greenhouse gas emission permits have been issued, which have been excluded from the emissions trading system based on the decision issued pursuant to a special regulation on air protection, should pay the annual tax on greenhouse gas emissions. The implementation of the measure is expected to continue in the period from 2021 to 2030 with modifications aimed at increasing efficiency. The possibility of including CO 2 emission tax in the price of fossil fuels for all non-ETS sectors will be considered, instead of the current CO 2 emission tax for stationary sources.  Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   study analysis of the effects of changing the CO 2 emission taxation model, which would consider the positive and negative effects of introducing a tax instead of the current CO 2 emission charge;  if the analysis confirms the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of introducing a CO2 tax, preparation of a by-law in 2022 which will define the amount of CO 2 emission tax for different types of fossil fuels and different energy sectors outside the ETS;   introduction of a tax instead of a CO 2 emission charge from 2023 onwards;  annual update of the amount of the CO 2 emission tax for different types of fossil fuels and different energy sectors outside the ETS;  maintaining and upgrading the Environmental Pollution Register database. Funds needed for implementation: HRK 1,000,000 for study analysis, preparation of the draft of the by-law and annual update of the amount of the CO 2 emission tax  Sources of financing: Funds collected through auctions Executive body: MEE Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: MEE Impact: Reduction in fossil fuel use and consequent reduction in emissions of CO 2 and other greenhouse gases.  Monitoring method: / 85  Connection to other dimensions: The CO 2 emission tax discourages the use of fossil fuels, which is indirectly linked to the use of RES (decarbonisation) and increasing energy efficiency. Connection to climate change adaptation: The measure is not related to adaptation to climate change. Research and development: The research will be conducted in preparatory study analyses. MS-6: Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy in the Republic of Croatia  Organizational measure; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: The European Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy brings together more than 9.5 thousand local and regional authorities in 59 countries who have voluntarily committed themselves to the implementation of the EU's climate and energy goals, taking advantage of a movement that unites many stakeholders around the world and the methodological and technical support provided by competent offices. The signatories of the Covenant support a joint vision for 2050: accelerating decarbonisation of their territories, strengthening capacity to adapt to the inevitable impact of climate change and allowing citizens to access safe, sustainable and affordable energy. The signatory cities are committed to action that will support the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 40% by 2030 and the adoption of a common approach to mitigating and adapting to climate change. In order to transfer their political efforts into practical measures and projects, the signatories of the Covenant undertake to submit the Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plan (SECAP). This initiative was endorsed by 82 cities and municipalities in the Republic of Croatia, so that the Covenant of Mayors covers over 2 million inhabitants in the Republic of Croatia. Activities: The following will be implemented within the framework of the measure:   Development of Sustainable Energy and Climate Action Plans (SECAP) for cities and municipalities signatories to the Covenant of Mayors and adopting a common approach to addressing climate change mitigation and adaptation within two years of accession to the Covenant;  Monitoring progress towards the SECAP target of at least 40% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (reporting on progress of plan implementation every two years);  Coordination of monitoring and implementation of activities envisaged in individual SECAPs and within the Integrated Energy and Climate Plan;  Use of data on activities and projects carried out within each SECAP during each subsequent revision of the Integrated Energy and Climate Plan. Funds needed for implementation: / Sources of financing: Budget of cities and municipalities Executive body: Cities and municipalities 86  Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: Covenant of Mayors, MEE Impact: Reducing energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions Monitoring method: Number of municipalities and cities signatories to the Covenant, number of SECAPs produced, reports on the progress of implementation of the plan at the municipality or city level.  Connection to other dimensions: The Covenant of Mayors encourages the use of renewable energy sources (decarbonisation) and increases energy efficiency, with the aim of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Connection to climate change adaptation: Climate change adaptation and climate change risk and vulnerability assessment of cities and municipalities are part of SECAP. Research and development: The measure is indirectly connected to research and development and innovative measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. MS-7: Charter of Cooperation for the Decarbonisation of Buildings by 2050 Information, educational, regulatory measure; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: The Charter of Cooperation for the Decarbonisation of Buildings by 2050, initiated by the Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning, which supports the EU's vision of decarbonisation of buildings by 2050, was initiated to improve cross-sectoral communication and cooperation between state administration bodies and the private sector. The aim is to create, through workshops and the Open Partner Dialogue, a broad network of connected professionals who are ready to engage in dialogue and contribute to the decarbonisation of the building stock by 2050. Open Partner Dialogues bring together representatives of state and local government, the academic community and the professional public, the construction and energy sectors, and related industries at thematic workshops organized by the Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning. The contents of the Charter include the achievement of energy and climate targets at the national and EU level through the decarbonisation of the building stock, renovation of buildings and construction of nearly zero energy buildings, aware of the importance of further reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, increasing the share of renewable energy sources, improving energy security and introducing innovation and smart technologies that allow buildings to support the overall decarbonisation of the economy. The signing of the Charter encourages continuous cooperation on the development of the Long-Term Strategy for the Renovation of the National Building Stock and the transition to a nearly zero energy building standard (nZEB). The signatories to the Charter support and promote the decarbonisation of buildings in their future activities, wherever possible. MS-8: Establishing a platform for the collection, use and storage of CO2  Research and analytical measure; Financial measure; implementation 2021-2030 87  Objective and description of the measure: The carbon capture and storage technology for large emission sources is not yet commercially available. According to Directive 2009/31/EC on geological storage of carbon dioxide, that is, Article 36 of the Industrial Emissions Directive 2010/75/EU, for power plants of more than 300 MW which have been granted a construction permit after the entry into force of Directive 2009/31/EC on geological storage of carbon dioxide, it is necessary to evaluate whether the following conditions are met: a) availability of a suitable location for storage, b) transport facilities are technically and economically feasible and c) upgrade of facilities for CO 2 capture is technically and economically feasible. If these conditions are met, the competent authority shall ensure at the site of the facility the appropriate space for equipment for CO 2 capture and compression. This is regulated by the Hydrocarbon Exploration and Exploitation Act (OG Nos. 52/18, 52/19), which enables CO 2 storage on the territory of the Republic of Croatia. This method should be further developed and the potentials and possibilities for this technology should be considered at the national level. In view of this, there are plans for the development of a storage capacity evaluation study, as well as the National Feasibility Study with the action plan for preparatory activities for carbon capture and storage projects. This study will cover the capture stages on emission sources, transport, injection and storage of CO2, and the interconnection of the CO 2 transport system with other EU countries.  There are also plans to inform the public about carbon dioxide capture and storage technology.  Activities: The following will be implemented within the framework of the measure:   Conducting research into the potential for geological storage of CO2 in the Republic of Croatia;   Developing/amending the evaluation study of storage capacities available in the territory of the Republic of Croatia  Implementation of CO2 geological storage projects in the Republic of Croatia in accordance with expressed potentials;   Informing the interested public about CO 2 capture and storage technology. Funds needed for implementation: HRK 1,000,000 for the study and action plan, and for the implementation of projects the amount will be determined after the analysis of potentials Sources of financing: CHA, Universities, EU funds Executive body: MEE, CHA Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: MEE, CHA Effect: Reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. Monitoring method: The research will be monitored through publications, and the CO 2 geological storage projects will be monitored through reports submitted by the bodies 88  implementing the projects to the competent authority and reports sent by the competent authority to the EC. Connection to other dimensions: The implementation of the measure has a direct impact on research, innovation and competitiveness. Connection to climate change adaptation: The measure directly affects CO 2 reduction. Research and development: The measure is directly connected to research and development and innovative measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. MS-9: Improving sustainability of urban areas  Research and analytical measure; Financial measure; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: The MCPP is in the process of developing new national Programmes of Green Infrastructure Development in Urban Areas and the Circular Spatial and Building Management Development Programme, which achieve the environmental, economic and social benefits of sustainable development. The Programme of Green Infrastructure Development in Urban Areas elaborates the goals and measures for the development of green infrastructure which, among other things, affect the increase of energy efficiency of buildings and construction areas, the development of green infrastructure in building construction, urban transformation and urban rehabilitation and the reduction of temperature in urban heat islands. The Circular Spatial and Building Management Development Programme elaborates goals and measures for circular spatial and building management that, among other things, encourage measures of circularity when planning new buildings, reusing abandoned and/or neglected buildings and extending the durability of existing spaces and buildings, reducing the amount of construction waste, and increasing the energy efficiency of buildings. The aim of this measure is to encourage cities and municipalities to build projects for revitalization and development of new urban environments on sustainability principles. The first step is to develop urban development plans, which, based on the assessment of sustainability indicators, will define development projects that will improve these indicators. In addition, co-financing from ESI funds will be provided for these projects in the period 2021-2027 (2030).. The Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning, as the ministry responsible for sustainable urban development issues, will define key sustainability indicators, which will include indicators in the areas of built space, economy, energy, emissions into the atmosphere, use of natural resources, environment and social aspects, which will need to be monitored both at the national and local level. The measure will facilitate sustainable development by linking strategic and spatial planning documents more directly and introducing performance measurements for planned and implemented projects. The measure will also provide financial support for such projects from ESI funds, in line with the target for the period 2021-2027. PO2 - "Greener Europe with low carbon emissions by promoting the transition to clean and equitable energy, green and blue investments, a circular economy, climate change adaptation and risk management and prevention". 89  Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   Development of the Programme of Green Infrastructure Development in Urban Areas;   Development of the Circular Spatial and Building Management Development Programme  Implementation of green infrastructure and circular spatial management projects through EU co-financing programmes. Funds needed for implementation: EUR 375,000,000.00 project financing and HRK 762,000.00 (excluding VAT) programme development Sources of financing: MCPP, EU funds Executive body: MCPP, Faculty of Architecture (AF) Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: MCPP Effect: Reduction of heat demand and energy consumption in public and residential buildings and increase in RES usage and consequently reduction in CO 2 emissions;  Monitoring method: The survey will be conducted through the Questionnaire sent to the LGUs Connection to other dimensions: The measure is innovative and enables the development of urban environments that will contribute to decarbonization and energy efficiency, but will also have numerous other social, economic and environmental benefits. Connection to climate change adaptation: With the development of green infrastructure in urban areas, buildings and construction areas become more resilient to some of the effects of climate change (e.g. extreme temperature conditions, urban heat islands, etc.)   Research and development: The measure is directly linked to research and development and innovative measures to improve the sustainability of urban areas MS-10: Establishing of Programme for Carbon Footprint Calculation and Reduction in Businesses Regulatory measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: The objective of the measure is to establish a Programme for the calculation and reduction of carbon footprints of non-ETS economic operators, in order to reduce the total greenhouse gas emissions for all activities which the economic operator is responsible for or dependent upon. It is necessary to calculate direct greenhouse gas emissions and their removal at the location of the economic operator, whether due to combustion of fuel in the thermal power plant, from the production process and/or from 90  the company vehicles, then indirect emissions that occur outside the economic operator's location, related to the procurement and consumption of electricity, heat and cooling energy, but also other indirect emissions/removals related to human, material, waste and final product flows. The carbon footprint calculation will enable businesses to familiarize themselves with the structure of greenhouse gas emissions, and to identify activities that most significantly contribute to the reduction in emissions, which is a good basis for the development and implementation of the Action Plan for the carbon footprint reduction. The implementation of the Action Plan would lead to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions and mitigation of climate change, which would mean easier fulfilment of commitments under the Paris Agreement. Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   improving the national model for the calculation of the carbon footprint of businesses with an integrated database of national greenhouse gas emission factors;  establishment and implementation of a voluntary programme to calculate and reduce the carbon footprint of businesses from 2021;  monitoring and analysis of the achieved reduction in the carbon footprint of businesses;   the adoption of a by-law that will establish the obligation to calculate carbon footprints and develop an action plan to reduce the carbon footprint of businesses will be considered. Funds needed for implementation: / Funding Sources: EPEEF (co-financing of carbon footprint calculations and development of action plans for non-ETS economic operators), regular work of state bodies Executive body: MEE, EPEEF Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: MEE Effect: Increasing energy efficiency, increasing RES usage, promoting sustainable use of resources and the circular economy, and mitigating climate change by reducing the greenhouse gas emissions of businesses. Monitoring method: The number of economic operators calculating the carbon footprint, developing an action plan, implementing measures and monitoring the impact of measures by reducing greenhouse gas emissions; calculating the annual reduction in greenhouse gas emissions for all economic operators participating in the voluntary/ mandatory programme of carbon footprint calculation and reduction. Connection to other dimensions: The calculation and reduction of carbon footprint of economic operators contributes to other dimensions, in particular to increasing energy efficiency and greater use of RES (decarbonisation). The implementation of the measure also has an indirect impact on increasing energy security and on research, innovation and competitiveness. 91  Connection to climate change adaptation: The implementation of measures to reduce the carbon footprint of economic operators is planned along with the integration of climate change adaptation measures and strengthening of resilience, i.e. reduction of vulnerability of RES technologies to climate change. Research and development: The implementation of innovative measures to reduce carbon footprints as a result of research and development is encouraged. MS-11: Establishing of platform for circular economy Informative, educational, regulatory measure; implementation: 2021-2030 According to the 2018 Circular Economy Package, the EC elaborated 54 measures in the Circular Economy Action Plan COM (2015) 614 and the Circular Economy Monitoring Framework COM (2018) 29 final. A systematic approach needs to be developed in all value chains relevant to the Croatian economy, addressing the aforementioned measures in the Action Plan, on the basis of which the Commission integrates the principles of circular economy into the production and consumption of plastics, water management, food systems and special waste flow management. It is necessary to set up a cross-sectoral thematic working group to identify the stakeholders in the circular economy (focus on industry and suppliers of raw materials, energy-generating products and packaging) and draw up a national action plan for the transition to circular economy. The inclusion of the representatives of the Republic of Croatia in the Stakeholder Platform for the European Circular Economy provides direct access to innovations and best practices, as well as cooperation. The measure is related to MS-12 and all measures in GO. MS-12: Establishing a platform for bioeconomy  Informative, educational, regulatory measure; implementation: 2021-2030 In the context of bioeconomy development, it is necessary to link three key aspects: the development of new technologies and processes; market development and the competitiveness of biomass-based sectors and the political will to co-operate with policy and stakeholders to achieve the bioeconomy in the Croatian context. This should ensure the transformation of existing "traditional" stakeholders of the bioeconomy (farmers, family farms, food processing, wood processing, pharmaceutical and chemical industries...) into new, modern stakeholders whose products are no longer based on non-renewable carbon (bioplastics, biofuels, biochemicals, products of "traditional" stakeholders with a smaller carbon footprint...) and prepare them for the announced EU funds for the transition to bioeconomy. In order to move to bioeconomy, it is necessary to adapt the sectors of agriculture, forestry and waste management in order to balance the supply and demand for biomass, which includes the establishment of collection and logistics centres for biomass and bio-refineries. The measure is related to POLJ-4,7,9 and TR-5,9 and 12. Through this platform, national stakeholders will connect with initiatives in the EU.   92  MS-13: Establishing a platform for hydrogen technologies Informative, educational, regulatory measure; implementation: 2021.-2030 The role of hydrogen in energy and transport systems of the future is expected to be more significant, especially as the goals for reducing greenhouse gas emissions are more ambitious. It is therefore necessary to identify, in a timely manner, the opportunities associated with the use of hydrogen, to consider its use in the coming decade, and to explore the possibilities of financially stimulating hydrogen production and consumption. To this end, a hydrogen technology platform will be established, bringing together national stakeholders relevant to the research and application of hydrogen technology, monitoring the development of hydrogen technologies at the EU and international level and serving as a link between national, EU and international levels.   The measures related to industrial processes are presented below. In monitoring the effectiveness of these measures, an important role will be played by the Nature Protection Information System, run by the State Institute for Nature Protection, within the MEE. IP-1: Reduction of clinker content in cement production Economic and environmental measures; implementation: 2021.-2030 Of the total direct carbon dioxide (CO2) emission from cement production, about 60 percent is related to the clinker production process, and the other 40 percent is due to fuel combustion in a rotary kiln and for other needs in the cement production process. By reducing the clinker content, i.e., by increasing the proportion of mineral additives in cement production, the required amount of clinker produced is reduced, which contributes to the reduction of total CO2 emissions in cement production. The clinker content in cement is defined by the standard HRN EN 197-1. The increase in the proportion of mineral additives in cement depends on the composition of the raw material, the availability of additives of the appropriate composition on the market and on the market requirements for certain types of cement with a higher proportion of additives and a smaller proportion of clinkers. IP-2: Limiting fluorinated greenhouse gas emissions  Regulatory, economic, educational measure; implementation: 2021.-2030 Implementation of Regulation (EU) No. 517/2014 in the Republic of Croatia is regulated by the Law on Implementation of the Regulation (EU) No. 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on fluorinated greenhouse gases and repealing Regulation (EC) No 517/2014 842/2006 (OG 61/17, 118/18), effective from 1st January 2019. 93  The measure defines activities and procedures for the prevention of fluorinated greenhouse gas emissions, conducting equipment leakage checks, use of equipment with leakage detection systems, keeping records of equipment on which leakage checks should be carried out, collection of fluorinated greenhouse gases to ensure their recovery, recovery or destruction, the development of a producer responsibility system for the collection of fluorinated greenhouse gases and their renewal, recovery or destruction, and the implementation of training and certification programmes. IP-3: Gradual decrease in the amount of fluorocarbons that can be placed on the market  Regulatory, economic, educational measure; implementation: 2021-2030 The measure refers to the gradual limitation of the amount of hydrofluorocarbons available on the EU market by 2030 to 21% of the total quantity of hydrofluorocarbons placed on the market during the reference period 2009 to 2012, as laid down in Regulation (EU) No. 517/2014. Regulation (EU) No. 517/2014 introduces a system of quotas for the placing of hydrofluorocarbons on the market. The calculation of the benchmarks and the allocation of quotas should be based on reported quantities of hydrofluorocarbons placed on the market during the reference period 2009-2012. The quotas for the placing hydrofluorocarbons on the market shall be allocated to each producer and importer for each year, beginning in 2015, on the basis of benchmarks, applying defined percentages to calculate the maximum amount of hydrofluorocarbons to be placed on the market and the allocation mechanism. IP-4: Restricting and prohibiting market placing of certain products and equipment Regulatory, economic, educational measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Fluorinated greenhouse gases with high greenhouse potential are restricted for use in new refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment, fire extinguishing systems, foam suppressants and aerosols. IP-5: Reduction of fluorinated greenhouse gas emissions from mobile air-conditioning systems  Regulatory measure; implementation: 2021.-2030 Directive 2006/40/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on emissions from air-conditioning systems in motor vehicles and amending Council Directive 70/156 / EEC was implemented in three stages. The last phase came into force on 1st January 2017 by limiting the possibility of retrofitting air conditioning equipment designed to contain fluorinated greenhouse gases with a global warming potential of more than 150 in motor vehicles, and prohibiting the charging of air conditioning equipment with those gases.  94  The measures related to waste management are presented below. GO-1: Preventing generation and reducing the amount of solid waste Regulatory, economic, educational measure; implementation: 2021-2030 It is the first priority in waste management, according to the Act on Sustainable Waste Management (OG 94/13, 73/17, 14/19). Prevention and reduction of the amount of waste include municipal waste, production waste and sludge from wastewater treatment plants. This measure should be achieved through cleaner production, nurture, and education, economic instruments, implementation of waste management regulations and investment in modern technologies. In accordance with the Act, quantitative targets and deadlines for reducing the total amount of waste disposed of at non-compliant landfills are defined. Disposal of waste at non-compliant landfills in Croatia is prohibited after 31st December 2017.  Under Directive (EU) 2018/850 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 1999/31 / EC on landfills, Member States should take the necessary measures to reduce the amount of municipal waste disposed of by 2035 to 10 % of the total amount (by mass) of municipal waste produced or less. Croatia has been given a five-year delay in meeting this target, as it is among the Member States that dumped more than 60% of municipal waste in landfills in 2013. Accordingly, Croatia must take the necessary measures to reduce by 2035 the amount of municipal waste disposed of to 25% of the total amount (by weight) of municipal waste generated or less. GO-2: Increasing the amount of separately collected and recycled solid waste Regulatory, economic, educational measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Apart from the Sustainable Waste Management Act, the quantitative targets and deadlines for increasing the amount of separately collected and recycled municipal waste are also defined by the Waste Management Plan of the Republic of Croatia for the period 2017 - 2022 (OG No. 3/17). By 2020, it is necessary to secure the preparation for reuse and recycling of the following waste materials: paper, metal, plastic and glass from households and possibly from other sources if these waste streams are similar to household waste, at a minimum share of 50% of waste weight. According to Directive (EU) 2018/851 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30th May 2018 amending Directive 2008/98 / EC on waste, Member States should take the necessary measures to increase the preparation for re-use and recycling of municipal waste to at least 55 % mass by 2025, 60% mass by 2030 and 65% mass by 2035. Croatia has been given a five-year grace period to meet these targets, as it recycled less than 20% of municipal waste in 2013 among Member States. Accordingly, Croatia must take the necessary measures to increase preparation for the reuse and recycling of municipal waste to at least 50% by 2025, 55% by 2030 and 60% by 2035. 95  GO-3: Assuring a system for the treatment and use of landfill gas Regulatory, economic, educational measure; implementation: 2021-2030 The Ordinance on the methods and conditions for waste disposal, categories and operational requirements for landfills (OG 114/15, 103/18, 56/19) and Ordinance on waste management (OG 117/17) stipulate strict technical operating requirements for landfills, which reduce possible adverse effects of landfills on the environment. At landfills where landfill gas occurs it is necessary to secure a gas collection system, whereby the gas must be treated and used. If collected landfill gases cannot be used for energy production, they should be burned in the area of the landfill and the emission of methane into the atmosphere should be prevented. The application of binding targets for the reduction of disposal and recycling of waste, described in the measures Preventing generation and reducing the amount of solid municipal waste and Increasing the amount of separately collected and recycled solid municipal waste, affects the amount of landfill gas generated. GO-4: Reducing the amount of disposed biodegradable waste Regulatory, economic, educational measure; implementation: 2021-2030 The aim of this measure is to reduce the amount of biodegradable fraction of waste disposed at landfills, which reduces emissions of methane produced by anaerobic waste decomposition processes. In accordance with the Sustainable Waste Management Act, quantitative targets have been identified for reducing the share of biodegradable municipal waste disposed at landfills. By the end of 2020, the share of biodegradable municipal waste disposed of in landfills must be reduced to 35% of mass fraction of biodegradable municipal waste produced in 1997. The application of binding targets for the reduction of disposal and recycling of waste, described in the measures Preventing generation and reducing the amount of solid municipal waste and Increasing the amount of separately collected and recycled solid municipal waste, affects the reduction in the amount of disposed biodegradable waste. GO-5: Use of biogas for biomethane production and electricity and heat generation  Regulatory, economic, educational measure; implementation: 2021-2030 The measure is related to measure RES-3: Encouraging the use of RES for electricity and heat production, within the framework of renewable energy sources and TR-5: Obligation to use renewable energy sources in transport, TR-12 and TR-9:. Within the waste management sector, the potential for reducing greenhouse gas emissions represents the potential for reducing methane emissions (produced by anaerobic decomposition of biodegradable fraction of waste), which is used for electricity and heat generation. Biomethane injection into the gas network is also envisaged. The measures related to the agricultural sector are presented below. 96  POLJ-1: Change in diet of cattle and pigs and animal feed quality Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 The objective of the measure is to reduce methane emissions from intestinal fermentations and the extraction of methane and nitrogen from manure management through changes in diet and changes in the composition of animal feed; improving the emissions reporting system. Emissions of greenhouse gases from livestock production are a direct consequence of the intestinal fermentation and decomposition processes of manure or are indirectly generated during food preparation or other farm operations. Therefore, the measures taken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are aimed at regulating digestive processes. In practice, many measures are most often applied at the same time, some of them acting simultaneously on intestinal fermentation but also reducing emissions during the handling of manure. There are various measures that can have a significant impact on emission reductions, some of which are already being implemented and some are expected in the reference scenario. By 2020, further work is expected on the implementation and synergy of dietary change activities, the treatment of feeds with a view to increasing their digestibility and the use of additives (additives) in animal feed. It is further possible to further reduce greenhouse gas emissions by implementing targeted sub-measures of dietary change, as well as improving the quality of bulk feeds and improving the grazing system. POLJ-2: Improvement of livestock facilities and manure management systems  Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: The measure aims to reduce methane, nitrogen, and ammonia emissions through improvements in animal nutrition and manure collection and storage systems. The manure management category is the source of emissions of nitrogen compounds, ammonia and particulates. Emissions come from the excreta of animal manure deposited in and around the dwellings and collected as liquid manure, solid manure or manure in a pit in the yard, with the latter two being viewed together as solid manures. Emissions come from animal housing and the yard, from storage areas and from the application of manure on the soil and during grazing. POLJ-3: Modification of the livestock farming system  Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Aim and description of the measure: The aim of the measure is to indirectly reduce methane and nitrous oxide emissions by increasing the share of cattle in the "cow-calf" system.  Measures to achieve indirect effects on the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions refer to measures that increase the intensity of production (greater quantity of animal products - milk, meat, eggs, etc., per animal and per unit of time), and thus indirectly affect the emission in 97  the process of intestinal fermentation or from manure. Their effect depends largely on the livestock farming system (technology).  It should be noted that raising cattle on pastures results in increased NO2 emissions compared to other farming methods, therefore any increase in the share of cattle in pastures should be accompanied by enhanced activities through other measures or in the livestock fund itself.  In Croatia, the problem is unused pastures and meadows with a large amount of agricultural land. To reduce costs, extensive pasture fattening is becoming increasingly important. Numerous variables are involved in determining the number of animals (conditional heads / ha) that can be on pastures without causing damage to natural resources: soil, climate, plant assemblage, species and age of livestock, water availability, sensitive areas (slope too steep, endangered species, wetlands, etc.), general soil condition and type of livestock production.  Considering the import of a large number of calves for fattening or fattened young cattle and meat, the establishment of a cow-calf system is imposed as a logical solution and a source of calves that can later be fed on the same holdings (pasture fattening) or fattening in specialized fattening establishments. POLJ-4: Anaerobic decomposition of manure and biogas production  Information, economic, regulatory measure; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: The objective of the measure is to reduce methane emissions from the manure management system for cattle and pigs by increasing the share of biogas plants.  The introduction of biogas plants results in the reduction of CO2 emissions resulting from the elimination of methane emissions due to the disposal of used detritus and due to electricity from renewable sources. Greenhouse gas emissions from transportation do not make much of a difference considering the small distances travelled to the plant or landfill. The biogas plant is divided into two parts. One is the digestor in which the process of anaerobic digestion generates biogas (gas obtained by the decomposition of organic matter under anaerobic conditions) and the other is the aggregate where that biogas is converted into electricity. The digestor has the highest investment costs for the biogas plant and also incurs operating costs resulting from the consumption of energy for heating the digestor and water.  The main mechanism for encouraging the use of biogas for electricity generation and for encouraging the construction of cogeneration biogas plants are the incentive prices (tariffs) that depend on the installed power of the plant. A common classification of biogas plants is large biogas plants, codigestion and farm. For small farmers, this is an expensive process, so the basis could be farmers' associations with the aim of reducing the installation cost of the plant. 98  In addition to reducing the source of readily degradable carbon in manure applied to agricultural land by anaerobic digestion in biogas plants, the nitrification process and N2O emissions are also potentially reduced. It is also envisaged to use biogas in transport and to inject biomethane into the gas network. POLJ-5 Improvement of the breeding program, animal health and welfare  Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Indirect reduction of methane and nitrous oxide emissions through breed improvements and enhancement of genetic potential.  The breeding programme is a set of selection procedures that achieve the genetic improvement of certain species and breeds of animals with the aim of reducing methane emissions from dairy cows, as well as increasing production intensity. This indirect effect on reducing greenhouse gas emissions depends largely on:  Genetic potential and species (breeding selection work) - Intensive selection to increase productivity (higher production of milk, meat, eggs, etc., higher daily growths, number of offspring) has indirect effects, since more animal products are produced with fewer animals and with less consumption food, while excreting less nutrient excreta. Furthermore, greater utilization of food results in reduced excretion of N compounds in faeces and urine, but also decreases the excretion and thus their potential emission. A positive genetic correlation between PME (predicted methane emission) and RFI (residual feed intake) indicates that cows with lower RFIs also have lower potential emissions. Thus, it is possible to reduce methane production in cows by selecting genetically more suitable cows with respect to methane emissions. Genetic variability assumes a decrease of 11-26% over a ten-year period, but may be greater by applying a selection programme. However, there are several doubts, such as the lack of accurate methane measurements (and the main assumption is that methane produced per unit of food does not affect RFI levels), as well as predicting the potential consequences of genetic selection. To overcome these limitations, it is necessary to collect data on feed intake and methane emissions from dairy cows.   Health status and mortality rate - preserving health is a prerequisite for efficient livestock production. Positive effects are evident through increased food intake and utilization, higher production, reduced mortality and greater animal welfare. This has an indirect effect on emissions.   Duration of production cycle (days of fattening, feeding days) - has an indirect effect in species categories of livestock used for meat production, and is closely related to the genetic potential of individual units as well as the composition of the meal (meeting nutritional needs).  99  POLJ-6 Improvement and change of soil tillage system (reduced tillage) Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Increasing soil carbon sequestration through improvements and modifications to soil treatment systems.  Soil treatment systems are crucial for the parameters that are important for the storage of soil water, in general water-air relationships, water losses by evapotranspiration, soil thermal state, and thus microbial activity and soil respiration. The issue of reducing CO2 emissions from agricultural soils in Croatia has not been sufficiently investigated in local conditions.  Reduced tillage is the application of the results of scientific research and practical checks that result in a change to the conventional tillage system by reducing the depth of basic and supplementary tillage, omitting one or more working operations, reducing the frequency of tillage, or completely omitting tillage.  Thus, reduced tillage can be divided into basic concepts:  Reducing classic tillage systems   Minimum tillage  No-till  Conservation tillage  Rational tillage Detailed pedological surveys conducted in Croatia are only one of the input parameters for the general assessment of the suitability of land for the application of no-tillage systems, but a project is needed that would provide detailed answers to the question of the suitability of soils for no-tillage in Croatia. In conditions of global climate change and more frequent and intensive droughts (according to the IPCC, in the regions of southern, south-eastern and eastern Europe, and thus in the Republic of Croatia, a reduction in soil humidity of 15-25% can be expected in the warm half of the year), perhaps the most important the task of reduced tillage becomes the accumulation and storage of water in the soil. At the same time, in years of abundant rainfall, which have also been occurring lately, there is often excessive saturation of the soil with water, which makes the problem of tillage even more difficult to solve. Other reasons for applying these tillage systems are related to improvements in the biological, chemical and physical properties of the soil and to the prevention and mitigation of erosion. Management systems that include conservation tillage, organic fertilization, keeping part of the area under lawns, appropriate crop rotation, etc. have a positive impact on the uplift of organic matter in the soil, which plays a key role in maintaining all soil roles. The direct impact on greenhouse gas emissions from a reduced tillage system is primarily related to a significant impact on organic carbon content (increase in soil organic matter accumulation, especially in combinations of minimum tillage systems and intermediate crops in cereal cultivation) and from the point of view of reduced 100  energy consumption (fossil fuels) due to fewer machine hours. Reduced tillage is also advantageous from the standpoint of weed control, establishing optimal soil functioning and optimal crop height per unit of production area - i.e., a total reduction in production costs.  Agrotechnical interventions, as well as processes by which the content of organic matter in the soil can be maintained or even increased in Croatia are not satisfactorily implemented. Problems in the reduction of soil fertility are caused by the apparent decrease in the yield of cultivated crops, as well as difficult cultivation of the soil, the reduced utilization of applied fertilizers, and the overall efficiency of production. The use of different tillage systems also alters current established understandings about the relationship between tillage and fertilization, which requires additional analysis to avoid acidification and excessive fertilization with nitrogen fertilizers, especially in the initial establishment of conservation treatments.  POLJ-7 Extension of crop rotation with higher share of legumes  Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Defining the potential for organic matter content change / increasing soil carbon sequestration through crop rotation.  Fertilization is a system of plant production practiced on arable land, which represents the regular, spatial (swapping fields) and temporal (swapping crop) crop rotation. When determining crop rotation, care must be taken of soil type and fertility, pH value, climatic conditions, and the impact of culture on soil fertility, structure, and nutrient supply. Fertilization is planned individually for each economy according to production requirements, where adherence to the recommended sequence of cultures is essential. Crop rotation must include three basic groups of plants - arable crops, cereals and legumes. Practiced crop rotation, today, together with soil treatment systems, strongly influence changes in the content of organic matter in the soil. Narrow crop rotation in which corn and winter wheat are almost necessarily included, without intensifying crop rotation, with the illicit burning of harvest residues, is a practice that cannot have a favourable effect on increasing the content of organic matter in the soil. The crop rotation intended to have a long-term effect on maintaining the same humus level should include leguminous crops, clovers, clover grass mixtures, and should, where possible, include the sowing of second crops for green harvests. According to the results of Butorac et al. (1995), average humus content of soil for different crops, from tobacco monoculture, over two two-field, three-field, two four-field, and one five and six-field crop rotation, varied from 1.3 to 1.6%, but in the 10-year period there was a significant differentiation in terms of differences in humus content according to crop rotation types. From this it can be seen that the studies which study the effect of practiced crop rotation on the changes in the chemical, as well as the physical and biological characteristics of the soil, must last for a long time, since even a 10-year period is not considered long enough to study such changes. 101  Sowing leguminous crops has many beneficial effects for agricultural soils. This binds atmospheric nitrogen, which is used immediately for protein synthesis and prevents the risk of groundwater contamination by nitrates that otherwise occur with the intensive application of mineral nitrogen fertilizers. The soil is enriched with organic matter, which has multiple positive effects on improving and maintaining the favourable physical, chemical and biological properties of the soil. Soil fertility is maintained and cultures that follow in the crop rotation are allowed to use biologically bound atmospheric nitrogen. Individual crops (clover) can be effective in soil carbon sequestration. Furthermore, growing leguminous crops reduces the amount of nitrogen-rich organic fertilizers to be applied. As a rule, they do not need to be fertilized except only in small amounts at the beginning of their vegetation for initial growth and development until they form root knots and until the process of nitrogen fixation begins. POLJ-8 Intensification of crop rotation by using intermediate crops  Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Changes in organic matter content / increase of carbon sequestration in soil and reduction of nitrate leaching by sowing of intercrops.  The principles of good agricultural practice in soil and water protection against nitrates recommend the introduction of intercrops (second crops) between the harvest of the main crops. Sowing intermediate crops that can be used to feed livestock or plow for green fertilization will utilize residual nutrients, prevent further evaporation of soil water, reduce carbon loss from soil (eliminating the negative effect of "bare soil"), prevent nitrogen leaching into groundwater (especially in lighter soils) and increase organic mass on farms that have a narrow crop rotation on their arable land. Leguminous crops bind nitrogen from the air to enrich the soil, preserve and stimulate microbial activity in the soil and prevent soil erosion. The increased cost of agricultural production per hectare is usually offset by savings in animal feed preparation or reduced need for mineral fertilizers. The problems that arise in this process concern the time and organization of work on the farm, but they are solvable, which can only be conditionally said for the drought that can occur at the time after the harvest of the cereals, whereby the sowing of second crops is questionable. POLJ-9 Improvement of mineral fertilizer application methods  Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Reduction of nitrous oxide emissions from agricultural soils due to optimization of mineral fertilizer application.  Mineral fertilization has a very complex effect on soil organic matter. As a rule, intensive fertilization can affect the higher production of biomass of crops, weeds, but also microorganisms of the soil, which is especially true for soils that have no other fertility restrictions other than a lack of nutrients. The modern development of agriculture in Croatia implies the introduction of new technologies, of which for agricultural production the so-called 102  "Variable liming" and "variable fertilization rate" or "site-specific management" are very interesting. The basis for fertilization are soil fertility maps that are made using the kriging method. This creates the preconditions for much better sustainable soil management. Modern machines for the precise distribution of materials are already sold in Croatia today, but they cannot be used without knowing the differences in soil fertility. The introduction of information technology, remote sensing with applications in agriculture, and the production of yield maps are nowadays commonplace. In this way, the income of users of new technologies is generated, as well as the savings of farmers in the application of fertilizers, and thus a favourable environmental impact. The basis for fertilization is the results of soil analysis, which should be provided on each farm over a 4-5 year period. Subjective, "experiential" or visual assessments most often result in minimal increase or even decrease in crop yields and quality, as well as increased consumption of mineral fertilizers - which in addition to increased production costs also entails an increased loss of unused nitrogen from the soil as well as unnecessary acidification of the soil.  In addition to optimizing the application of conventional mineral fertilizers to reduce nitrogen loss from the soil, the application of slow-acting fertilizers has a positive effect. Controlled or slow-acting nitrogen fertilizers find their use today primarily in high-income production (horticulture, etc.). The older generation of such fertilizers is not economically viable in the production of cereals because of the high cost of fertilizers and the low income per crop. The emergence of new crop fertilizers suitable for growing crops (especially polymer-coated fertilizers) has, through research, shown the possibility of reducing the need for fertilizers per hectare by up to 35%, with unchanged or increased revenues, making them economically viable and cost-effective. The application of limestone materials, together with fertilization and soil treatment, is crucial in the overall solution of the problem of agricultural soils management because of the need to correct the excess acidity of soils in many agricultural holdings.  POLJ-10 Improvement of organic fertilizer application methods  Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Research on increasing carbon sequestration in soil by improving the methodology of application of organic fertilizers  The use of organic fertilizers is important for the circulation of soil organic matter, of which there is a relatively large database on the global scale. Unfortunately, there are no stationary studies of in Baranja certain changes in the humus content during the 24-year period of intensive plant production from 1967 to 1990. In almost all soils the humus content increased (0.1-1.64%), depending on the amount of solid manure used. 103  Organic fertilizers stimulate the activity of soil microbes much more strongly than mineral fertilizers and bring much less salt and acid into the soil. Efficiency depends on the microbial activity in the soil, i.e. at what rate they are degraded and transformed into nutrients suitable for adoption. Organic fertilizers have a much longer degradation time, so their effect extends over many years. Regular application of organic fertilizers increases the amount of humus in the soil, improves soil properties, in particular the structure resulting in a better water-air ratio, higher water retention, greater availability of all nutrients and greater erosion resistance on sloping surfaces. Underground application - direct injection into the soil by the use of an injector prevents the loss of ammonia and reduces or completely eliminates the spread of unpleasant odours. The method is applicable to the application of liquid form of bovine and porcine manure, with NH3 emissions lower by up to 30%.  When using the injector, even though the loss due to volatilization or the amount of nitrogen available to plants increases, it is also possible to increase the loss of nitrous oxide from the soil. Therefore, the importance of proper dosing and application of fertilizers (organic and mineral) is further increased. The limiting factor for increasing the use of specialized equipment for the injection of organic fertilizer is the relatively high cost of the equipment itself, and therefore such investment is indicated for larger (or enlarged) farms with the need for large fertilization capacities.  POLJ-11 Agroforestry  Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Defining the potential and benefits of various agroforestry technologies to increase soil carbon sequestration  Agroforestry encompasses technologies used in forestry and agriculture to create greater productivity, economic viability, environmental friendliness and sustainable land use. Agroforestry is a common name for land management systems whereby permanent woody species are integrated with the cultivation of crops and / or animals on the same area unit. The integration can be of a spatial character or in a time sequence. Ecological-economic interaction between forestry and agricultural components is common. The goal is to create diverse, productive, profitable, healthy and sustainable land management systems. The production capacity of the land is used to a greater extent, but at the same time a balance is reached between economic viability and habitat protection on the basis of sustainability or sustainable development. Research shows that, with all the other benefits, some agroforestry systems (e.g. agro-silviculture) are significant carbon sinks.  Agroforestry is applied worldwide to agricultural and forest land; including areas with degraded habitats (erodible areas, economically poorly valued devastated and degraded areas. Through experiments, agroforestry should show its applicability in our conditions with 104  respect to different forms and divisions, but also to different needs. It is important to point out that some elements of agroforestry have been recorded throughout history in the coastal and littoral areas of our country. First of all, the cultivation of land on terraces that were used to raise perennial plantations; olive groves, vineyards, various fruit trees and could only be used for animal husbandry in a limited manner.  POLJ-12 Hydromelioration interventions and systems of protection against natural disasters  Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Increasing the share of agricultural soils under irrigation and the consequent reduction of nitrate leaching from agricultural soils.  Agriculture, more than any other activity, pollutes the water with nitrogen (nitrates), phosphates and plant protection products (pesticides). The intensification of agriculture has led to the intensification of agrochemical pollution. Environmental friendly agriculture means controlled application of mineral fertilizers, controlled drainage, re-use of drained water and use of water of appropriate quality.  Irrigation with larger rations than necessary can result in increased nutrient leaching from the arable horizon, especially nitrogen into deeper horizons, resulting in the need for additional fertilization and thus increased emissions and increased costs. Drainage has the function of draining excess amounts of water from a green surface, which most often occurs after heavy rain. Also, changes in soil air-water relationships also affect the activity of beneficial microorganisms Microorganisms, with proper irrigation and drainage of excess water, have enhanced activity that reduces soil degradation and thus CO2 losses. The activity of earthworms is also increased, who transfer carbon into deeper layers where it is longer lasting. In Croatia, surface drainage systems are built on an area of about 1050000 ha, and underground drainage systems are built on an area of about 149000 ha. The age of most of the system is over 25 years. Hydro-amelioration systems play a major role in sustainable development. Significantly improve the properties of existing hydro-amelioration systems. Human interventions in water control include the application of technologies and new management to ensure adequate quantities of water for plants; preventing excessive soil moisture and salinization; protecting the soil from flooding and maximizing profits by using water. These interventions take place within economic, social, and environmental constraints. Croatia is in a good position because it has sufficient water supply, but successful technological innovations in drainage and irrigation systems depend to a large extent on research programmes and personnel education in the sector. The main goals are therefore the growth of agricultural production and the sustainability of the system. 105  POLJ-13 Introducing new cultivars, varieties and species Information, educational, economic measures; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Determining the potential of new cultivars, varieties and crops to increase soil carbon sequestration  The introduction of new cultivars, varieties and crops is, in principle, subject to emergency adaptation measures (per the UNDP) - i.e., time-critical measures that also include the implementation of the system as a defence measure against climate change impacts on food production or achieving lower emissions. In this context, it is important to encourage the development, education, and implementation of technologies at the national and regional levels, including encouraging the transition and adaptation of producers (as well as consumers, and therefore of the entire production chain) to the production of new agricultural crops, or by enabling and encouraging the use of cultivars and varieties who are more resistant to drought or disease, have a smaller carbon footprint, or have other benefits. An example of a possible strategy is the more rational production and use of new leguminous crops in response to lack of protein in animal feed, the need to reduce the use of mineral fertilizers and to reduce soil fertility. Due to their considerable amounts of protein, naturally occurring legumes require a large amount of N, they can provide a large part (or complete need) of this nutrient from the atmosphere through biological fixation, provided they live in symbiosis with the effective strains of root nodule bacteria. It is for these reasons that little-known plant species that have a symbiotic relationship with root nodule bacteria have been recently investigated, such as Galega orientalis Lam., a new perennial forage legume living in effective symbiosis with Rhizobium galegae. The main advantage of growing Galega orientalis Lam. is almost exclusively the use of symbiotically bound elemental nitrogen and not N from mineral fertilizers or small doses of "initial" mineral N up to 40 kg / ha. Galega as a new legume is interesting because of its longevity (7-15 years), resistance (soil type, drought, temperature); it is one of the earliest legumes, contains high-value proteins (1.5-2 t/ha); represents an excellent choice of animal feed (in green form, pelleted, as hay or in silos), with grain yield 3-6 times higher than in alfalfa; fertilizing and seed prices are low. POLJ-14 Changes in human nutrition Information measure; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Gathering data on the potential for reducing greenhouse gas emissions from changes in diet  106  The inefficient production of cereals as animal feed as well as the direct emission of methane from the intestinal fermentation of ruminants mean that the greenhouse gas emissions are significantly higher in the production of foodstuffs of animal origin compared to those of plant origin. By switching a significant portion of the population to a low-meat diet (in favour of fish), a vegetarian or wholly vegan diet, it is possible to achieve significant reductions in emissions - both due to lesser use of mineral fertilizers (and consequently less nitrogen compounds) required for animal feed production, and also due to the reduction of methane emissions from the intestinal fermentation of livestock. The additional benefits are significantly lower water and fuel consumption in agricultural production. These emission savings can be expressed as an individual's carbon footprint based on all the factors mentioned, depending on their diet. Although the Republic of Croatia is one of the countries with less consumption of meat, it still represents a significant component in the diet of the average population. Thus, for example, the emission of a kilogram of CO2 equivalents in an adult (with a diet of 2000 kcal, which is the average daily need for energy from food), whose diet contains a significant proportion of meat (more than 100 grams per day) will be from 5.66 to 7. 19 kg per day, while in the vegetarian diet this amounts to 2.89 kg of CO2 equivalents per day. The estimated carbon signature of residents over the age of 10 is about 7,500 kilotonnes of CO2 equivalents for 2012. It should be noted that the Republic of Croatia does not meet all its meat needs, and that a significant part of red meat (up to 65% of beef and 40% of pork) comes from imports. Therefore, the total dietary carbon footprint is greater than the estimated total emission. The first step is certainly the research on the current dietary habits of the inhabitants of the Republic of Croatia. POLJ-15 Collection and treatment of agricultural plantings and residues for energy use  Information measure; implementation 2021-2030 Energy exploitation of post-harvest residues (with emphasis on crop production) is one of the most significant ways of producing biomass energy in the Republic of Croatia. Other possible sources are the remnants of the winter harvest of almost all horticultural species, as well as the fast-growing energy-producing crops that are planted / sown solely for the production of biomass for its conversion to energy. In order to develop the biomass market, and starting from the fact that Croatian farms are the smallest in the EU, biomass collection and logistic centres will be established using the existing infrastructure (utility companies, competence centres, business zones) in order to reduce the unit cost of production of biomass products, and capitalize on innovation capacity and equipment necessary for innovative biomass products for bioeconomics. Collection and logistic centres will link farmers who possess biomass, processing of biomass into new products with higher added value, development of new products and placing these new products on the market.  107  The measures related to the land use, land-use change and forestry sector (LULUCF) are presented below. LUF-1: Development of the Land Management Strategy of the Republic of Croatia  Regulatory, economic, information measure; implementation: 2021-2030 By 2027, it is necessary to develop a Land Management Strategy of the Republic of Croatia. For its development, it is necessary to implement projects that: 1. Establishes a unique land information system in the Republic of Croatia or determine the areas of each LULUCF land category by using spatially correctly determined data, for each land category and for each land conversion type from one land category to another  2. Conducts analysis of all LULUCF land categories depending on cover, land use and management practices used on each land and associated emissions / outflows to consider the potential of each of the storage sites within each LULUCF land category to reduce emissions and increase greenhouse gas outflows 3. Make detailed projections for the development of future emissions / outflows in the LULUCF sector after carrying out the above analysis  The calculation of emissions / outflows in the LULUCF sector and these projects should form the basis for planning the cover, use, and management of LULUCF land categories for each of the storage sites in order to develop a Land Management Strategy and to properly define the measures to be implemented in each land category, which will reduce emissions and increase greenhouse gas outflows in the Republic of Croatia. Improving and defining forest fire protection measures should be an integral part of this strategy.  LUF-2: Carbon accumulation on forests areas Economic measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Carrying out activities that contribute to increasing the stores of carbon of forests, in particular in biomass storage and ensuring that removals in a given period exceed those defined by the Forest Reference Level (FRL). These activities are, for example, reforestation, transfer of forest stands to a higher cultivation form, selection of species for replenishment, etc. Maintaining an outflow larger than that defined by the FRL also ensures an increase in emission units that can be transferred to sectors outside the ETS as well as the use of flexible mechanisms. Further assessment of the effectiveness of the implemented measures and activities from the Rural Development programme to reduce / contain emissions and increase / contain greenhouse gas outflows and develop new guidelines for further management in the forestry and agricultural sector with the application of measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change. It is necessary to promote the management of land categories that are beneficial to the climate and the environment, and to develop further development guidelines based on the knowledge and experience gained from the implementation of this measure.   108  LUF-3: Reforestation works Economic measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Afforestation on non-forested areas (in terms of IPCC methodology) is an activity that generates outflows. Due to the regulations in the field of nature protection governing the establishment of Natura 2000 sites, the Republic of Croatia is not able to dispose of all lawn areas (according to the national regulation: non-overgrown production forest land) for afforestation purposes. Considering that there are non-cultivated agricultural areas in the Republic of Croatia that have been neglected for many years, the problem of these areas must be adequately addressed when developing the Land Management Strategy. The justification of converting these areas to forested areas by afforestation needs to be assessed. It should be borne in mind that there is no restriction on the application of the amount of outflows in the calculation of outflows due to afforestation, and that these outflows are fully taken into account in the calculation. An assessment of the effects of afforestation of additional non-overgrown, productive forest land on the fulfilment of Croatia's obligations related to the use of renewable energy sources is also needed. Guidelines for further development need to be drawn up based on the knowledge and experience gained from the implementation of afforestation activities. In case of introduction of afforestation measures on neglected agricultural land, the measure will require strengthening of seed production and nursery services in the forestry sector and cultivation of planting material necessary for the implementation of these works. LUF-4: Manufacture and use of wood and wood products  Regulatory, economic, educational, information measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Harmonize the available data and statistical reports and use new research to harmonize the information available for the purposes of different reporting to international organizations in order to provide accurate, transparent, and high quality reporting, as well as to create harmonized bases for the adoption of medium and long-term strategies in the forestry and wood processing sector. It implies mapping of forestry and timber industrial production. Encourage the use of wood products in traditional and new products in order to increase outflows and reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the wood storage facility. This also requires the regulation of exports of untreated and semi-treated timber, which encourages the development of the domestic timber industry, and the regulation of energy timber exports increases the share of energy production from renewable sources, thus fulfilling international commitments. Outflow-generating activities must be promoted to ensure that wood products and wood are used for energy purposes in ways that contribute to meeting both EU targets by 2030 (reducing emissions and increasing the share of renewables in total energy consumption) and are beneficial to climate and environment. Guidelines for further development need to be drawn up based on the knowledge and experience gained from the implementation of this measure.  109  LUF-5: Agricultural land management  Economic measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Conducting activities in the management of agricultural land in a way that contributes to reducing the emission factor is of interest to family farms, since the EC CAP regulations state that the level of incentives increases if the emission factor is lower due to the way they are managed. Land management practices that can affect emissions and outflows, for example in soil storage, are: soil treatment methods, plantation/crop life (rotation period) and crop / plantation type, fertilizer application, residue management, erosion control, application of irrigation systems etc. Activities in a climate and environmentally beneficial manner should be promoted, and guidelines for further development should be drawn up based on the knowledge and experience gained from the implementation of this measure. LUF-6: Pasture management  Economic measure; implementation: 2021-2030 Conducting activities in the management of pastures in a way that contributes to reducing the emission factor is of interest to family farms, since the EC CAP regulations state that the level of incentives increases if the emission factor is lower due to the way they are managed. Activities in a climate and environmentally beneficial manner should be promoted, and guidelines for further development should be drawn up based on the knowledge and experience gained from the implementation of this measure. LUF-7: Implementation of technical projects and scientific research in the LULUCF sector  In the period of up to 2030 and 2050, it is necessary to provide funding for the implementation of technical and scientific projects in the LULUCF sector. Scientific projects should enable the development of different models for the purposes of moving to a higher level of IPCC methodology (Tier 3) with the aim of determining as accurately as possible the GHG emissions / outflows and, consequently, the planning of measures to reduce emissions and increase outflows.  The following are measures related to reducing fugitive emissions. FUG-1: Refinery modernization  Implementation of investments in the modernization and improvement of production in order to maintain the competitiveness of refineries and decrease fugitive emissions from refineries.   110  FUG-2: Measures to increase energy efficiency by improving processes and process units  Increasing energy efficiency is achieved by implementing measures that contribute to reducing energy intensity through more rational use of energy and raw materials and by modifying production processes and equipment at pumping stations and refineries, which contributes to reducing fugitive emissions.  FUG-3: Methane flaring In order to reduce fugitive emissions, instead of fuming methane, methane is burnt on a flare. In this way, methane emissions are reduced by 95-99% depending on the efficiency of the flares.  ii. Where relevant, regional cooperation in this area At a regional workshop held in Ljubljana in July 2019, the proposed topics for regional cooperation within the framework of the dimension of decarbonisation / emission and greenhouse gas removal were  joint development of parts of national climate change adaptation strategies (e.g. for the Adriatic region),  joint management of waterways,  joint development of a soil map (relevant for the cultivation of biomass for non-food purposes and for monitoring the carbon content of soil),  scientific cooperation in the study of hydrogen, the removal and storage of greenhouse gases  exchange of experiences related to greenhouse gas emissions and removals and adaptation to climate change. Countries participating in informal regional coordination are considering the proposals made and will agree on next steps. iii. Without prejudice to the applicability of State aid rules, financing measures, including Union support and the use of Union funds, in this area at national level, where applicable  Part of the costs of implementing the measures envisaged within the dimension of decarbonisation - greenhouse gas emissions and removals will be financed from the state budget, auction funds, the Modernization Fund and extra-budgetary funds, and the use of EU funds is expected, namely cohesion policy funds through technical assistance to national bodies administration and direct support from future operational programmes.  Financing of the envisaged measures is also expected through the programmes of the European Investment Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and 111  other financial institutions and the Modernization Fund. The development of innovative projects for funding from the Innovation Fund will be encouraged. The use of financial resources from the sale of a part of the national quota in sectors outside the ETS was not considered, as there is no information on how transfers between Member States will be carried out, and so far there is limited experience in this area and no information on the cost of these units of emission.  3.1.2  Renewable energy  i. Policies and measures to achieve the national contribution to the binding 2030 Union target for renewable energy and trajectories referred to in Article 4, item (a), subitem 2 and, if applicable and available, elements from section 2.1.2, including sector-specific measures and technology-specific measures  The expected impact of a group of measures (OIE-1, OIE-2, OIE-3 and OIE-4) to encourage the use of RES is equal to an increase in the immediate consumption of RES in projections for the scenario with additional measures compared to the scenario with existing measures, which is 3. 59 PJ in 2030.  OIE-1: Information, education and capacity building for RES use Information measure; implementation 2021-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Dissemination of information to the general public and target groups will be conducted through the organization of targeted informational campaigns related to investments in systems using renewable energy sources, especially in systems for own needs. Information, education, and capacity building for use of RES will be implemented at the national level and the target sectors are the energy sector (NACE code D), primary sector (NACE code A), manufacturing (NACE code C), construction industry (NACE code F) and the population of the Republic of Croatia (general population). If necessary, additional analyses of the possibilities of decarbonisation of the system will be carried out and the results will be introduced to the expert and general public. Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   education and promotion of good practice, especially regarding small projects (up to 500 kW);  implementation of educational programmes on the use of RES in kindergartens and schools;  setting up and organizing an advisory service with experienced practitioners involved, especially for small projects (up to 500 kW);  available information on administrative procedures, accredited equipment and certified installers; 112   promotion of the use of systems in buildings (photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, heat pumps, biomass stoves and boilers);  promotion of reconstruction of old mills and water mills into small hydropower plants;  promoting the use of RES on islands;  promoting the use of biomethane in transport and its injection into the gas network;  development of a guide for integration of biomass projects into the bioeconomy for small projects (up to 500 kW);  capacity building for the bioeconomy;  designing and implementing new business models for the realization of anaerobic digestion (AD) plants for the production and use of biogas and biomass cogeneration;  integration with the waste management system - use of biodegradable waste component as energy resource;  capacity building and enhancement for all market players (active customers, energy communities, renewable energy communities, energy suppliers, aggregators, system operators, installers);  promotion of corporate power purchase agreements (corporate PPA) for larger price-related projects;  consulting with the financial sector, promoting good practice and education, for larger projects. Funds needed for implementation: about HRK 5 million a year  Funding sources: Emission allowance auction assets (EPEEF) and EU funds.  Executive body: MEE - implementation and patronage of education and promotion programmes, organization of advisory service, design of new business models for realization of biogas plants and biomass cogeneration; EPEEF - providing part of the funds, participating in promotion and education activities; MCPP - promotion of the use of RES in buildings; CCE - promotion of the use of RES systems to entrepreneurs  MA in cooperation with LGUs - promotion and supply of biomass for the needs of the bioeconomy, decarbonisation of livestock, development of the bioeconomy; Suppliers - promotion of corporate contracts; MEE in collaboration with LGUs - with programmes to promote RES in kindergartens and schools Monitoring Bodies: MEE  Effect: Increase in energy production and the share of RES in total energy consumption and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector and the above target sectors. Increasing the number of citizens interested in using RES. 113  Tracking method: Number of events, number of users  Connection to other dimensions: The measure is related to the dimension of increasing energy security and developing the internal energy market. The measure can also be linked to the energy efficiency dimension by promoting the use of RES in buildings, with energy efficiency measures. Relationship to climate change adaptation: The use of RES is planned with the integration of climate change adaptation measures and strengthening of resilience, i.e. reduction of vulnerability of RES technologies to climate change.  Research and development: Information, education and capacity building for RES use is not directly related to research and development.  OIE-2 Spatial planning requirements for using RES Regulatory measure; implementation: 2021- 2024 Objective and description of the measure: Analysis of the existing state of spatial capacities, defining guidelines and criteria for specific spatial planning elements for RES planning at the state, county and local level.  Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   analysis of spatial plans with review of planned locations, mapping of resource potential for individual renewable sources (wind, solar, hydropower, geothermal water for energy purposes) with respect to existing and advanced energy conversion technologies and adaptations to climate change based on ecosystem characteristics within specific space for utilization of RES (planned and potential space), possibilities of energy storage from RES and integration into the existing distribution system;   identification and mapping of spatial, environmental (bio-ecological, landscape, geological) and social (use of space) and infrastructural constraints, and the sensitivity of space for plant construction and operation, given the characteristics of existing and advanced RES utilization technologies;   defining guidelines and criteria for the selection of spaces suitable for RES exploitation, spatial-planning conditions and protection measures in procedures under special laws;   adopting guidelines and criteria for the regulation of specific spatial planning elements in the state-level RES utilization space and their implementation into state-level spatial planning documents at the national, regional and local levels, with the application of protection measures in procedures under special laws;   professional education and encouragement of cross-sectoral cooperation of experts in the field of spatial planning, nature and environment protection, energy and other experts relevant to the spatial planning and development of RES projects; 114   upgrading existing information systems with the data necessary to identify the potential constraints and sensitivity of space to the construction of RES facilities (generating plants using RES with associated infrastructure).  Funds needed for implementation: initial funds HRK 1 000 000 + funds earmarked for implementation of the strategy and action plan for the application of protection measures in procedures under special laws + regular work of state bodies + a new generation of spatial plans  Funding Sources: EU funds, World Bank (for mapping and analysis); budget of the state, counties, cities and municipalities (for the application of protection measures in procedures under special laws and the new generation of spatial plans)  Executive body: MCPP and MEE, in cooperation with the Ministry of Agriculture; counties, cities and municipalities  Monitoring (supervision) bodies: MCPP, MEE  Effect: Increasing the installed capacity of RES in the next generation PPs with sustainable use of space and natural resources (acceptable environmental impacts) and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  Tracking method: Number of counties that have defined the conditions for the location and construction of RES plants, on the basis of prescribed guidelines, with due regard for the sensitivity of the area in their area, with the application of protection measures in procedures under special laws; duration of administrative procedures in the framework of development of RES projects; installed capacity of RES facilities (production facilities using RES with associated infrastructure).  Connection to other dimensions: The measure is related to the dimension of increasing energy security (conditions for increasing energy production) and developing the internal energy market. Within this measure, some research needs to be carried out, so the measure is related to the research and development dimension. Relationship to climate change adaptation: The use of RES is planned with the integration of climate change adaptation measures and strengthening of resilience, i.e. reduction of vulnerability of RES technologies to climate change.  Research and development: Yes. Link through exploration of resource potential and mapping of spatial, environmental and infrastructural constraints and sensitivity of space for plant construction and operation.    115  OIE-3 Promoting the RES use for production of electricity and thermal energy Financial measure; implementation 2021 -2030 Objective and description of the measure: Provide financial incentives for the development of RES projects for electricity and heat production. Encouraging the use of RES for electricity and heat production will be implemented at the national level. Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   The Croatian energy market operator (CEMO) continues to pay incentives to generate electricity to RES-using power plants for the duration of the purchase agreement;  CEMO prepares three-year RES plans and announces tenders for assigning market premiums;  CEMO establishes the functioning of the premium system under the Renewable Energy Sources and High Efficiency Cogeneration Act with system modifications made possible by changing the market status of individual RES technologies and developing day-ahead and within the daily electricity market solely to mitigate the market risks of new RES projects; the premium system is implemented to a minimum extent as a transition measure to full market integration of RES;  The activities of reviewing and analysing potential geothermal potentials and initiating the launch of bidding procedures to select the most suitable bidder for the exploration of geothermal waters for energy purposes will continue;  Continued application of the surplus energy absorbing model from self-supply plants and self-producing end-customers with possible investment support and the supplier's obligation to absorb surplus energy;  The EPEEF participates with financial incentives on the investment side for RES projects for the production of heat energy, and for smaller systems using RES;  The EPEEF allocates part of the proceeds from the sale of emission units through EU ETS auctions for measures to stimulate RES on the investment side and to relieve end customers from increasing the RES incentive fee;  The Ministry of Agriculture, through the Rural Development Programme, ensures the financing of investment grants for biomass and other RES projects.  Funds needed for implementation: HRK 6-8 billion for the entire observed period  A relatively rapid drop in the levelized costs of electricity generation from solar and wind power is expected to reach the market price level, implying their rapid integration into the operation of the system without additional incentives. The use of biomass, biogas, hydropower and geothermal energy is also expected to continue. Furthermore, it is necessary to encourage the exploitation of geothermal energy by reducing exploration risk, which can be realized with EU funds, in order to balance the price of energy obtained from geothermal water with other RES. 116  Funding Sources: RES fee (CEMO); proceeds from the sale of renewable energy in the market; proceeds from trade in guarantees of origin; the proceeds from the auctioning of emission allowances (the EPEEF) for RES investment grants and as additional revenue to the EPEEF for the operational promotion of RES managed by CEMO; EU funds; special funds (European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development, etc.) to support biomass projects.  Executive body: CEMO - payment of incentives, establishment of a premium model with a protective price and a shortened duration of premium agreements, invitation to tender; MEE - making plans; EPEEF - participation in RES investment grants and as support of operational incentive systems; MA - implements the Rural Development Programme and participates in RES investment grants; HA (Hydrocarbon Agency) - defining exploratory actions, determining rules and conditions when exploring and exploiting geothermal waters for energy purposes, as well as providing expert support in conducting public tenders.  Monitoring Bodies: MEE  Effect: The measure will ensure an increase in energy production and a share of RES in total energy consumption and, consequently, a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. It also creates preconditions for the establishment of a monitoring system to meet the sustainability criteria and the expected reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from biomass plants. Tracking method: Energy balance, namely: 1) the amount of electricity generated from RES, according to the reports of CEMO and the system operator; 2) the amount of energy produced for heating and cooling, according to statistical reports. Monitoring the effects will also take place through the measurement of soil organic matter and carbon content. Connection to other dimensions: The measure is related to the dimension of increasing energy security, since the expected result of the measure is an increase in energy production from locally available sources and the development of the internal energy market.  Relationship to climate change adaptation: The use of RES is planned with the integration of climate change adaptation measures and strengthening of resilience, i.e. reduction of vulnerability of RES technologies to climate change.  Research and development: The measure is related to the research and development of RES technologies and the integration of RES into energy systems.   OIE-4 Developing a regulatory framework for RES use Regulatory measure; implementation: 20212022 117  Objective and description of the measure: The existing legal framework needs to be supplemented and procedures and practices developed. The goal by 2022 is to fully adopt the regulatory framework and established procedures at national level. The current regulatory framework for the use of renewable energy sources is covered by several laws. The Renewable Energy Sources and High Efficiency Cogeneration Act with a series of by-laws is worth mentioning as a key piece of legislation. The existing legal solutions need to be complemented by the development of a regulatory framework for active customers, aggregators, energy communities, renewable energy communities (participation in local energy production, distribution, storage and supply and provision of energy and aggregation services) and energy production for own needs, in accordance with the provisions of the renewable energy promotion directive, the electricity directive and the internal electricity market regulation. If necessary, an action plan will be developed for the development of energy and renewable energy communities. It is also necessary to establish a regulatory framework and conditions for establishing sustainability criteria, reducing greenhouse gas emissions for biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels and the use of digestates for fertilization, thereby enabling the decarbonisation of agriculture through greater use of organic fertilizers, increasing organic matter in soil and reducing agro-input costs. A regulatory framework needs to be put in place to link the processes of geothermal energy use, which include the exploration phase in accordance with the Act on the Exploration and Exploitation of Hydrocarbons and the electricity and heat production phase in accordance with the Renewable Energy Sources and High Efficiency Cogeneration Act. Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   MEE regulates the regulatory framework for on-site production by defining connection rules, redemption obligations and net metering;  MCPP regulates and introduces obligations for the use of RES in new buildings (construction-related regulations);  CERA and HEP-DSO are developing new methodologies for determining distribution grid charges that would take into account distributed generation by energy customers;  MCPP ensures the continued functioning of certified installer systems for small RES systems16;  All participants are tasked with ensuring the general simplification, development and maintenance of administrative procedures;  16 Refers to securing a certification programme or equivalent qualification programme for installers of renewable energy systems: photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, shallow geothermal systems and heat pumps, and smaller biomass boilers and stoves 118   The Ministry of State Property (MDI) makes it easier to regulate state land use and reduce fees;  The MA ensures the establishment and monitoring of sustainability and digestate use criteria;  Arranging the area of bilateral contracting (corporate power purchase agreement). Funds needed for implementation: -  Funding sources: Budgetary funds  Executive body: MEE - general arrangement of the legislative framework, supplementing the existing one with new solutions; MCPP - arrangement of obligations to use RES in new buildings, continuation of the functioning of the system of certified installers; MSP - regulates simpler use of state land; CERA - development of methodology for determining distribution grid fee and development plans.  Monitoring Bodies: MEE  Effect: The result of the implementation of the measure is a functional RES market and an increase in energy production and a share of RES in total energy consumption.  Tracking method: Energy balance, plan and implementation of legislative acts  Connection to other dimensions: The measure is related to the dimension of increasing energy security and developing the internal energy market (legislative sector development).  Connection to climate change adaptation: The use of RES is planned with the integration of climate change adaptation measures and strengthening of resilience, i.e. reduction of vulnerability of RES technologies to climate change.  Research and development: /  ii. Where relevant, specific measures for regional cooperation, as well as, as an option, the estimated excess production of energy from renewable sources which could be transferred to other Member States in order to achieve the national contribution and trajectories referred to in point 2.1.2 At a regional workshop held in Ljubljana in July 2019, the proposed topics for regional cooperation within the decarbonisation/renewable energy sources dimension were  joint development of RES projects, analysis of statistical transfer opportunities,  cooperation in the context of the "Clean Energy Initiative for EU Islands", 119   exchange of experiences related to energy communities and energy production from RES for own needs,  exchange of experiences related to energy-positive neighbourhoods and joint development of project proposals for the Joint Program Initiative Urban Europe,  exchange of experiences related to the integration of RES into space and social acceptance of RES. Countries participating in informal regional coordination are considering the proposals made and will agree on next steps. iii. Specific measures on financial support, where applicable, including Union support and the use of Union funds, for the promotion of the production and use of energy from renewable sources in electricity, heating and cooling, and transport  The required amount of RES support for electricity is estimated in the next section. iv. Where applicable, the assessment of the support for electricity from renewable sources that Member States are to carry out pursuant to Article 6(4) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 It is estimated that support of HRK 6 to 8 billion is required in the observed period. The aforementioned amount of aid was calculated on the basis of the investment subsidy required to make the levelling cost of electricity 55 EUR / MWh. This calculates the amount of subsidy required for all the technologies envisaged per MW of installed capacity. That amount was multiplied by the projected power installed in power plants, by technology. The final amount of support required will depend primarily on the development of technology. v. Specific measures to introduce one or more contact points, streamline administrative procedures, provide information and training, and facilitate the uptake of power purchase agreements This is stated in RES- vi. Assessment of the necessity to build new infrastructure for district heating and cooling produced from renewable sources In terms of greater integration of RES into district heating systems and the eventual development of district cooling systems, it is necessary to create the conditions for connection and operation of production plants for the production of heating and cooling energy from RES. Aspects of the procedure and cost of connection of such facilities need to be further considered in such a way as to maximize the technology of high-capacity electric boilers and heat pumps as production plants for district heating and cooling systems. It is also estimated that greater 120  integration of RES into district heating systems and the construction of district cooling systems in the market will offer highly competitively priced thermal energy, which will consequently create the need to build new and expand existing distribution infrastructure. Of particular interest are geothermal power plants, which are mainly of the baseload type, which means that they are in operation throughout the year with very short shutdown periods. In the projects of geothermal power plants, in addition to electricity production, there is also the possibility of cascading use of the remaining thermal energy of geothermal water for various purposes (heating, space heating, dryers, aquaculture, etc.). Such systems increase the efficiency of geothermal plants and thus the cost-effectiveness of the entire geothermal project. The use of geothermal energy reduces the consumption of conventional energy sources (e.g. fossil fuels), resulting in a positive environmental impact. The use of RES in district heating systems will be supported by the implementation of the ENU-17 measure Increasing the efficiency of the heating system. vii. Where applicable, specific measures to encourage the use of energy from biomass, in particular for the production of new biomass, taking into account the availability of biomass: domestic potential and imports from third countries and other uses of biomass in other sectors (agriculture and forestry sectors); as well as measures for the sustainability of biomass production and use The most important measures to encourage the use of biomass energy are measures POLJ-4 Anaerobic manure decomposition and biogas production, POLJ-15 Collection and treatment of agricultural plantations and residues for energy use and TR-13 Advanced biofuel market development plan. Sustainability of biomass production and use will be promoted under measure MS-11 Establishing a bioeconomy platform. 3.1.3  Other elements of the dimension i. Where applicable, national policies and measures affecting the EU ETS sector and assessment of the complementarity and impacts on the EU ETS Based on the Decision on the Fee for Renewable Energy Sources and High-Efficiency Cogeneration (OG 87/17), ETS payers pay a lower fee for renewable energy and high-efficiency cogeneration in the amount of HRK 0.007 / kWh, while the fee for other end customers of electricity is 0.105 HRK / kWh.  Croatia introduced CO2 emission allowances in 2007 based on the Regulation on unit charges, corrective coefficients and detailed criteria and benchmarks for determining the charge for emissions of carbon dioxide into the environment (OG 73/07, 48/09, 2/18). The payers are individual stationary sources, which emit CO2 in excess of 450 tonnes per year and the unit charge is HRK 14 / tCO2. ETS participants are exempted from the obligation to pay CO2 emission allowances, to avoid the double financial burden due to greenhouse gas emissions.  121  Reducing the amount of the Fee for Renewable Energy Sources and High-Efficiency Cogeneration and waiving the CO2 emission payment obligation facilitates business operations for ETS participants from Croatia, on the other hand, the relatively high price of emission units on the ETS market (secondary EEX spot market on 12/06/2019 at 10:23 am: EUR 24.63 / tCO2e) stimulate the implementation of measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  ii. Policies and measures to achieve other national targets, where applicable Climate change mitigation and adaptation are considered pillars of climate policy implementation. In terms of adaptation to climate change, adoption of the Strategy on Climate Change Adaptation in the Republic of Croatia for the period until 2040 with an outlook to 2070, the first document of its kind in the Republic of Croatia, is underway. The development of a Climate Change Adaptation Strategy is a fundamental prerequisite and appropriate instrument for the successful implementation of the vulnerability assessment process, the implementation of adaptation measures, and in this regard, for increasing the resilience of certain sectors and the entire economy and society to climate change. According to the Draft Adaptation Strategy, the vulnerability of the Republic of Croatia to the effects of climate change is high, especially for the sector of agriculture, forestry, fisheries, energy and tourism, because the success of all these sectors depends largely on climatic factors.  Five national priorities have been identified under which climate change adaptation measures need to be implemented. These are: 1. ensuring sustainable regional and urban development  2. ensuring preconditions for the economic development of rural areas, coastal areas and islands 3. ensuring sustainable energy development 4. strengthening management capacity through a networked monitoring and early warning system  5. ensuring continuity of research activities. Based on the general principles for defining measures, analysing the current situation by sector and assessing the degree of vulnerability and possible responses to the challenges of climate change adaptation, the Draft Adaptation Strategy identifies a set of measures for each sector as well as cross-sectoral measures. By their nature, the measures are regulatory and administrative, implementing, public education and awareness measures, and research and development measures. In addition to character, measures are also prioritized (measures of very high importance, high importance and medium importance).  The adaptation strategy will be implemented through implementation action plans, which will include the elaboration of concrete measures and activities for a specific five-year period..  122  iii. Policies and measures for achieving low-emission mobility (including transport electrification)  The expected effects of a group of low-emission mobility incentives are:  reduction of final energy consumption in transport in projections for the scenario with additional measures compared to the scenario with existing measures, which amounts to 4.48 PJ in 2030;  RES share in transport of 13.2%.  TR-1: Providing information to consumers on fuel cost-effectiveness and CO 2 emission of new passenger cars Regulatory measure; implementation: 2015  2030  Objective and description of the measure: According to the Ordinance on availability of information on fuel cost-effectiveness and CO2 emissions from new passenger cars (OG 7/15), each supplier of new passenger cars intended for sale is obliged to provide consumers with available information on fuel consumption levels and specific emissions of CO2 of passenger cars. On the basis of the Ordinance, the Ministry of the Interior as the central state administration body responsible for road traffic safety shall once a year and no later than 31st March of the current year prepare the Guidelines on cost-effectiveness of fuel consumption and CO 2 emissions of new passenger cars available for purchase on the market in the Republic of Croatia. The Guidelines contain required information for each model of new passenger cars available on the domestic market.  Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   Extension of information to other categories of motorized road vehicles.  Funds needed for implementation: The Ministry of Internal Affairs plans to finance the implementation of these activities within its annual budgets as an integral part of its regular activities.  Funding Sources: State Budget (Ministry of the Interior)  Executive body: MOI  Monitoring Bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency  Effect: Save energy, reduce CO2e emissions and reducing pollutant emissions  Monitoring method: /  Connection to other dimensions: a direct link to the energy efficiency dimension as it also informs fuel economy  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: /   TR-2: Special environmental fee for motor vehicles Regulatory, para-fiscal measure; implementation 2014 - 2030  123  Objective and description of the measure: The existing system of payment of a special environmental fee for motor vehicles is regulated by the Act on the Environmental Protection and Energy Efficiency Fund (OG 107/03, 144/12), and the Regulation on unit charges, corrective coefficients and detailed criteria and standards to determine the special environmental fee for motor vehicles (OG 114/14, 147/14). The special fee is charged taking into consideration the type of engine and fuel, engine operating volume, type of vehicle, CO2   Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   Conducting a detailed analysis to determine the need to modify and improve the existing payment system. The possibility of additional taxation of vehicles of certain environmental categories will be considered.  Funds needed for implementation: The Ministry of Environment and Energy plans to finance the implementation of these activities within its annual budgets as an integral part of its regular activities.  Funding Sources: State budget (MEE)  Executive body: MEE, EPEEF  Monitoring Bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency  Effect: Save energy, reduce CO2e emissions and reducing pollutant emissions  Monitoring method: /  Connection to other dimensions: a direct link to the energy efficiency dimension, as fees can be marketed and channelled towards more energy efficient vehicles  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: /   TR-3: Special tax on motor vehicles Regulatory, fiscal measure; implementation 2014 - 2030  Objective and description of the measure: Based on the "polluter pays" principle, the calculation model is based on CO2 emissions into the air from motor vehicles. The special tax is determined on the basis of the sales or market price of the motor vehicle, CO2 emissions expressed in grams per kilometre, engine volume in cubic centimetres and the level of greenhouse gas emissions. This special tax encourages the purchase of energy efficient vehicles and vehicles with lower greenhouse gas emissions. The implementation of the measure is ensured through the enactment of the Act on Special Tax on Motor Vehicles (OG 15/13, 108/13, 115/16, 127/17).  Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   Conducting a detailed analysis to determine the need to modify and improve the existing payment system. This will consider the possibility of additional taxation of vehicles of certain environmental categories, the possibility of eliminating the depreciation of the calculated special tax on used vehicles, and the possibility of redefinition of fees in view of the declared measurement cycle of fuel consumption and exhaust emissions (WLTP or NEDC) of a specific vehicle. 124   Funds needed for implementation: The Ministry of Energy and the Environment plans to finance the implementation of these activities within its annual budgets as an integral part of its regular activities.  Funding Sources: State budget (MEE)  Executive body: MEE, MFIN  Monitoring Bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency  Effect: Save energy, reduce CO2e emissions and reducing pollutant emissions  Monitoring method: /  Connection to other dimensions: a direct link to the energy efficiency dimension, as the tax policy can be marketed and channelled towards more energy efficient vehicles  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: /  TR-4: Monitoring, reporting and verification of greenhouse gas emissions in the life cycle of fuels and energy Regulatory measure; implementation: 2017  2030  Objective and description of the measure: In accordance with the Air Protection Act (OG 130/11, 47/14, 61/17), the supplier placing fuel on the domestic market will monitor greenhouse gas emissions per unit of energy during the fuel life cycle. Suppliers should draw up a report to be verified and submitted to the Ministry of Environment and Energy - Institute for Environmental and Nature Protection. In accordance with the Act, the Regulation on the quality of liquid petroleum fuels and the method of monitoring and reporting and methodology for calculation of greenhouse gas emissions in the life cycle of delivered fuels and energy (OG 57/17) stipulates the method and deadlines for delivering reports on the quality of liquid petroleum fuels and reports on greenhouse gas emissions in the life cycle of fuels and energy to the Ministry of Environment and Energy, method of monitoring and reporting, methodology for calculating greenhouse gas emissions in the life cycle of fuels and energy, methodology for determining the level of greenhouse gas emissions in the life cycle of fuels per unit of energy for the baseline year 2010, methodology for calculating the contribution of electric road vehicles to the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, format of the report and retention period, and manner of data delivery to the competent bodies of the European Union. Activities: The implementation of legal obligation will continue within the framework of the measure.   Funds needed for implementation: The Ministry of Environment and Energy plans to finance the implementation of these activities within its annual budgets as an integral part of its regular activities.  Funding Sources: State budget (MEE)  Executive body: MEE  Monitoring Bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency  Effect: Save energy, reduce CO2e emissions and reducing pollutant emissions  Monitoring method: Preparation and verification of GHG emission reports in the fuel lifecycle  Connection to other dimensions/  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: /  125  TR-5: Regulatory framework development for cleaner transport Regulatory measure; implementation: 2021  2030  Objective and description of the measure: Amend laws and by-laws to ensure the development of alternative fuel infrastructure, to increase the share of renewable sources in final energy consumption in transport, and to promote clean and energy-efficient vehicles in road transport. The objectives of the measure are to increase the share of RES in traffic by 2030, 37% of the share of light vehicles meeting the set requirements in the overall public procurement of light vehicles at the national level by 2030, 13% of the share of light vehicles meeting the set requirements in the total public procurement of heavy vehicles at the level states by 2030 and 65% of the proportion of buses that meet the set requirements in the total public procurement of buses at the state level by 2030.  Activities: The following activities will be implemented within the measure:   Laws and by-laws should be adopted at the national level to regulate the conditions for the construction of electric vehicle charging stations (including charging stations with the associated photovoltaic system), the conditions of distribution, billing and the unit price of alternative energy used in transport, the conditions for charging stations for LNG and CNG / CBM and consider the requirements of the new Energy Performance of Buildings Directive. It is necessary to anticipate amendments to the laws by stipulating obligations to establish infrastructure for alternative fuels for entities managing the transport infrastructure and amendments to the laws regulating the conditions for construction of parking spaces so that the obligation of establishment of filling stations for alternative fuels is introduced. Fulfilment of this obligation is a prerequisite for further development of the alternative fuels infrastructure.  The basic document that regulates and promotes the use of biofuels is the Act on Biofuels for Transport (OG 65/09, 145/10, 26/11, 144/12, 14/14, 94/18). In 2010, the National Action Plan that promotes the production and use of biofuels in transport for the period 2011 - 2020 was prepared in accordance with this Act. The plan establishes a policy that promotes increased production and use of biofuels in transport in the Republic of Croatia. The plan includes an overview and assessment of the conditions on the market of fuels for transport and air protection, comparative analysis, long-term goals, including the targeted biofuels market and measures to promote increased production and use of biofuels in transport. The measures stipulated by the action plan include measures promoting the production of feedstock for biofuels, measures promoting biofuel production with regard to the fee for promotion of production, measures promoting biofuel consumption with regard to distributors of liquid petroleum products for placing biofuels on the market, administrative measures and research and development activities. The 2013 National Renewable Energy Action Plan identified the goals and policies related to increasing the share of RES in final energy consumption by 2020 and the specifically estimated contribution of energy of biofuels in transport.  In the forthcoming period, Croatia will transpose the obligations under the Renewable Energy Promotion Directive, adopted in December 2018. It will be necessary to achieve an ambitious target in the context of renewable energy in the transport sector in 2030, and in particular to stimulate the use of renewable electricity in transport. In order to ensure that the expected increase in electricity demand above the current baseline in the transport sector is ensured through the use of additional renewable energy production capacities, the framework for the additionality in the transport sector developed by the Commission will be transposed into the Croatian regulatory framework.  126   For the purpose of analysing the feasibility of meeting the target of 3.5% of advanced fuels by 2030 (Article 25 (1) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources) from domestic raw materials and the development of domestic technological capacity, research and analysis of advanced biofuel production opportunities. The aim of the mentioned analysis is to determine the possible capacities for domestic production based on the availability of raw materials and technological parameters. As part of the elaboration of the regulatory framework, financial mechanisms will be established to support the development and use of favourable options identified in the analysis. The establishment of a regulatory framework and conditions for establishing monitoring of sustainability criteria and greenhouse gas savings for biofuels, bioliquids and biomass fuels is foreseen within the OIE-4 measure.  The Act on the Promotion of Clean and Energy-Efficient Vehicles in Road Transport (OG 127/13) is currently in force, which stipulates that all purchasers and carriers performing public liner transport on the basis of a public service contract, when purchasing vehicles for road transport, must take into account their energy and environmental effects during the period of vehicle utilization. It is necessary to transpose the revised obligations under the Directive on the Promotion of Clean and Energy Efficient Road Transport Vehicles (EU 2019/1161) in order to support low-emission mobility in the context of the purchase, leasing, rental or leasing of publicly contracted road vehicles or contracting authorities if they are obliged to apply procurement procedures and operators to fulfil public service obligations under a public service contract.  In addition to the transposition of obligations from the directives in question into legislation, the Republic of Croatia will define an action plan and prescribe a timeframe for the gradual introduction of low-carbon solutions in the context of the provision of public services. In the near future, all public service providers will have the obligation to use only energy efficient low- or no- emission fleets.  Funds needed for implementation: Funding for the implementation of these activities is planned by the competent ministries (for transport infrastructure, energy, interior, construction and spatial planning and environment) within their annual budgets as an integral part of their regular activities.  Funding Sources: State budget (competent ministries)  Executive body: competent ministries  Monitoring bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency and other relevant ministries  Effect: Accelerating the development of the alternative energy market, increasing the share of RES in final energy consumption in transport, increasing the share of clean vehicles in road transport  Tracking method: RES reports on the market in the transport sector, reports on energy consumption in transport  Connection to other dimensions: direct connection to the energy efficiency dimension  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: Sustainable mobility and alternative fuels in transport require the development of new technologies in the field of vehicles, infrastructure and advanced management systems based on information and communication technologies.  TR-6: Financial incentives for energy-efficient vehicles Financial measure; implementation 2014 - 2030  127  Objective and description of the measure: In the context of co-financing of cleaner transport projects, it is necessary to define specific co-financing lines for specific purposes, for the purchase of vehicles of all categories with electricity, CNG / SBP, LNG / LBG and hydrogen. Incentives for co-financing the purchase of vehicles should be conducted consistently, transparently and continuously, and will be primarily geared towards alternative fuels for which the assessment of the existing situation has shown a minor representation in the total number of vehicles and will be time-limited until the minimum representation of vehicles is achieved. The minimum degree of market development shall be considered to be 1 percent of alternative fuel vehicles in the total number of vehicles registered in the country.  Activities: As part of the measure, co-financing activities for energy efficient vehicles will be implemented through public calls from the EPEEF.   Funds needed for implementation: HRK 900 million  Funding Sources: EPEEF from the proceeds from the auctioning of emission units, from the funds collected from the special vehicle fee and from the special environmental fee for the marketing of biofuels, ESI funds  Executive body: EPEEF  Monitoring Bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency  Effect: Save energy, reduce CO2e emissions and reducing pollutant emissions; estimated savings in 2030 0.25 PJ (decrease in consumption of gasoline and diesel fuel) and 0.1 PJ (increase in consumption of electricity); estimated CO2 emission reductions in 2030. 18.3 ktCO2e; cumulative energy savings in 2021-2030 1.39 PJ; cumulative CO2 emission reductions in the period 2021-2030, 101.8 ktCO2e  Tracking method: This measure will be monitored by the Energy Saving Monitoring, Measurement and Verification System (SMIV) estimation method.  Connection to other dimensions: direct connection to the energy efficiency dimension  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: Sustainable mobility and alternative fuels in transport require the development of new technologies in the field of vehicles, infrastructure and advanced management systems based on information and communication technologies.  TR-7: Development of alternative fuels infrastructure Financial measure; implementation 2019 - 2030  Objective and description of the measure: The aim of this measure is to facilitate the acceptance of alternative fuels by users/ consumers by strengthening the infrastructure for the distribution of alternative fuels and implementing common technical specifications for this infrastructure. This infrastructure measure will not directly affect the reduction of fuel consumption in transport, but certainly the development of infrastructure is a necessary prerequisite for the development of markets for vehicles and vessels using electricity, CNG / SBP, LNG / LBG and hydrogen in Croatia. Incentives for co-financing infrastructure will be primarily geared towards alternative fuels for which the assessment of the existing situation has shown an inadequate development of infrastructure and will be time-limited until the minimum infrastructure development is achieved. The minimum infrastructure development shall be considered to be one that corresponds to the minimum infrastructure targets from the NPF.  In addition, the measure provides for the establishment of a central register of alternative fuel infrastructure that will facilitate the user experience for drivers and ultimately provide a realistic insight into energy consumption for analytical purposes.  128   Activities: The measure will co-finance alternative fuel distribution infrastructure through public call for proposals from the EPEEF.   Funds needed for implementation: HRK 370 million  Funding Sources: EPEEF from the proceeds from the auctioning of emission units, from the funds collected from the special vehicle fee and from the special environmental fee for the marketing of biofuels, the Modernization fund, ESI funds, and other sources  Executive body: EPEEF (co-financing), MSTI (Central Infrastructure Register)  Monitoring Bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency  Effect: Accelerating the development of alternative energy-generating product markets  Monitoring method: /  Connection to other dimensions: direct connection to the energy efficiency dimension  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: Sustainable mobility and alternative fuels in transport require the development of new technologies in the field of vehicles, infrastructure and advanced management systems based on information and communication technologies.   TR-8: Promotion of integrated freight transport Regulatory measure; implementation: 2016  2030  Objective and description of the measure: The measure is regulated by the Act on Combined Transport of Goods (OG 120/16) and the Ordinance on Incentives in Combined Transport of Goods (OG 5/18), which stipulates incentives for combined transport of goods by rail, inland waters or sea, and incentives for combined transport of goods on road sections.  Activities: Implementation in accordance with the Law will continue. An analysis will be made to identify the need to modify and improve the existing system. In doing so, the possibility of including other road vehicles (except trucks) in the incentive system will be analysed.  Funds needed for implementation: The fees are provided for in the Ordinance on Incentives in Combined Freight, and are provided from the state budget.  Funding Sources: State Budget   Executive body: Ministry of the Sea, Transport and Infrastructure  Monitoring Bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency  Effect: Save energy, reduce CO2e emissions and reducing pollutant emissions  Tracking method: Reports on assigned incentives  Connection to other dimensions: direct connection to the energy efficiency dimension  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: /  TR-9: Promotion of sustainable intermodal transport at national level Information and organizational measure; implementation 2019 - 2030  Objective and description of the measure: The measure builds on the general and specific objectives defined in the Transport Development Strategy of the Republic of Croatia (2017-2030) in the context of energy efficiency/intramodality for rail, road, maritime, inland waterway 129  and urban, suburban and regional traffic (track modernization, signalling system, refurbishment of rolling stock, wagons, vessel fleet, logistic intermodal platforms, integrated public transport of passengers, etc.) Rail and generally multimodal infrastructure are lagging behind in comparison to highway infrastructure in terms of quality and connectivity. Investments are planned to develop a sustainable, integrated trans-European climate-resilient transport network. In maritime and inland waterway transport, the Republic of Croatia, in consultation with other Member States, will analyse the feasibility of introducing appropriate mechanisms to ensure the transition to low carbon solutions, in particular with regard to the application of alternative energy sources for navigation. In this context, an action plan for shipping will be defined, inter alia, defining appropriate emission standards for the coming period. Also, in air transport, the Republic of Croatia will define a plan and elaborate detailed guidelines for achieving significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. All activities related to defining the plan and guidelines will be developed jointly at the EU level, taking into account the views to be taken at the level of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).  Activities: Within the measure, activities envisaged by the Strategy will be elaborated and implemented.   Funds needed for implementation: Not estimated  Funding Sources: ESI Funds - Depending on plans and projects; Ministry of the Sea, Transport and Infrastructure   Executive body: Ministry of the Sea, Transport and Infrastructure  Monitoring bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency in coordination with MSTI  Effect: Save energy, reduce CO2e emissions and reducing pollutant emissions  Tracking method: The effects of this measure will be recorded separately by projects, prescribed by the TD methodology, with the possible addition / development of a new BU methodology  Connection to other dimensions: direct connection to the energy efficiency dimension  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: Sustainable mobility and alternative fuels in transport require the development of new technologies in the field of vehicles, infrastructure and advanced management systems based on information and communication technologies.  TR-10: Promotion of intermodal and intelligent transport and development of alternative fuels infrastructure at local and regional level Information and organizational measure; implementation 2019 - 2030  Objective and description of the measure: It is necessary to promote sustainable development of urban transport systems through the optimization of logistics of transport of goods and intelligent management of public parking spaces (ICT), introduction of integrated passenger transport, introduction of car-sharing schemes in cities, introduction of low emission zones in cities, introduction of public city bicycles systems (with and without electrical drive) and construction of the accompanying cycling infrastructure, intelligent traffic control (upgrade, adaptation and replacement of obsolete signalling devices and equipment, installation of advanced traffic equipment and intelligent traffic lights equipped with the autonomous power supply system from renewable sources, constructing and equipping central operating centres for monitoring and management of intersections with installed traffic lights). At the local level, it is necessary to continuously prepare and implement Sustainable Mobility Plans in cities, as well as strategic plans that build on the existing planning practices, and take into account integration, participation and evaluation principles to meet the citizens' mobility needs now and 130  in the future, and ensure better quality of life in cities and their surroundings. The activities will be accompanied by appropriate outreach campaigns. The objective of these measures is to cover all counties, large cities (with more than 35,000 inhabitants) and municipalities and cities that together form a geographical entity with more than 35,000 inhabitants.   Activities: Within the measure, co-financing activities will be implemented through public calls from the EPEEF as well as activities undertaken independently by the LGUs in accordance with their plans for the sustainable development of transport systems.   Funds needed for implementation: HRK 85 million  Funding Sources: EPEEF from the proceeds from the auctioning of allowances, from the special vehicle fee and from the special environmental fee for the placing on the market of biofuels, the Modernization Fund, ESI Funds, LGU budgets, EU funds - depending on plans and LGU projects  Executive body: EPEEF (Co-financing and Call for Proposals), LGUs - planning through annual and Action plans and implementation  Monitoring bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency in coordination with MSTI  Effect: Save energy, reduce CO2e emissions and reducing pollutant emissions; estimated savings in 2030 0.15 PJ; estimated CO2 emission reductions in 2030. 11.0 ktCO2e; cumulative energy savings in 2021-2030 1.19 PJ; cumulative CO2 emission reduction in the period 2021-2030. 87.1 ktCO2e  Tracking method: The effects of this measure will be recorded separately by projects, prescribed by the TD methodology, with the possible addition / development of a new BU methodology  Connection to other dimensions: direct connection to the energy efficiency dimension  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: Sustainable mobility and alternative fuels in transport require the development of new technologies in the field of vehicles, infrastructure and advanced management systems based on information and communication technologies.  TR-11: Training for drivers of road vehicles for eco-driving  Information measure; implementation 2011 - 2030  Objective and description of the measure: The aim of the measure is to raise awareness of the benefits of energy-efficient driving. Education on the eco-driving elements is carried out in short trainings (of around 60-120 minutes per candidate) among the drivers who received their driver's license prior to the entry into force of the Ordinance on Training of Driver's License Candidates (OG 13/09, 132/17), which introduced an obligation for all driving schools and instructors to carry out training on the elements of eco-driving during the standard training of candidates. It should be noted that the proposed measure does not apply to new drivers, which receive eco-driving training in accordance with the statutory obligations set out in the said Ordinance. Special elements of the national campaign should be devoted to eco-driving education for drivers of passenger cars, buses, commercial and heavy duty vehicles. It is planned to introduce a special educational module related solely to electric vehicles (driving education and charging habits). The measure plans to cover 1,000 drivers a year.  Activities: As part of the measure, co-financing activities for energy efficient vehicles will be implemented through public calls from the EPEEF.   Funds needed for implementation: HRK 18 million  131  Funding Sources: EPEEF from the proceeds from the auctioning of emission units, from the funds collected from the special vehicle fee and from the special environmental fee for the marketing of biofuels, ESI funds  Executive body: EPEEF  Monitoring Bodies: Ministry of Environment and Energy - National Coordination Body for Energy Efficiency  Effect: Save energy, reduce CO2e emissions and reducing pollutant emissions; estimated savings in 2030 0.03 PJ; estimated CO2 emission reductions in 2030. 2.2 ktCO2e; cumulative energy savings in 2021-2030 0.3 PJ; cumulative CO2 emission reduction in the period 2021-2030. 22,0 ktCO2e  Tracking method: This measure will be monitored by the Energy Saving Monitoring, Measurement and Verification System (SMIV).  Connection to other dimensions: direct connection to the energy efficiency dimension  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: /  TR-12 Promotion of boat transport using alternative fuels Financial measure; implementation 2019-2030 Objective and description of the measure: Under the "Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Establishment Act", alternative fuels are defined as fuels or energy sources that can at least partially replace fossil fuels. These include electricity, including battery, hydrogen, biofuels, synthetic and paraffin fuels, natural gas, including biogas, in gaseous (CNG) and liquefied natural gas (LNG) and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). In accordance with the "National Coastal Line Maritime Traffic development plan" and considering that the Republic of Croatia is a maritime country with developed coastal line traffic, and in addition has navigable river routes and lakes, this measure would co-finance the projects of gradual transition of the existing obsolete fleet to alternative and / or hybrid solutions and new construction. Ships using alternative fuels are generally more expensive than ships using conventional fuels, so there is no expressed interest of shipowners to invest in such ships. Therefore, it is necessary to financially support the conversion / construction of such vessels to the extent that the purchase price is equalized, or that shipowner is put in the same position as a shipowner using conventional fuel ships. This measure builds on the measure related to the development of alternative fuel infrastructure in terms of permanent users / consumers on that infrastructure, while significantly affecting the potential reduction of pollution of the sea, rivers and lakes.  Activities: The measure will co-finance the conversion of the existing fleet of ships and the construction of new alternative fuel vessels through public calls from the EPEEF.   Funds needed for implementation: HRK 300 million  Funding Sources: EPEEF from proceeds from the sale of emission units through auctions, ACLMT tenders, ESI funds and other sources  Executive body: EPEEF  Monitoring Bodies: MSTI - National Coordination Body  Effect: Accelerating the development of active users of alternative energy, saving energy and reducing CO2 emissions and reducing pollutant emissions  Tracking method: Reports on the number of alternative fuel vessels via the Croatian Register of Shipping  Connection to other dimensions: direct connection to the energy efficiency dimension  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: Opportunity for research and development from the design phase to finished crafts.  132  TR-13: Advanced biofuels market development plan  Regulatory, promotional measure; implementation: 2021-2030, updated every 2 years Objective and description of the measure: increase of RES share in transport by 2030, through development of the advanced fuels market and achievement of the planned share of advanced fuels in final energy consumption in transport through the least cost criteria and the largest multiplier. The implementation of the measure is based on amendments to the relevant laws and bylaws based on the Directive on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources, and in particular to establish conditions for monitoring the sustainability of biofuels and greenhouse gas savings. Activities:  Analysis and exploration of the scenario for meeting the share of advanced fuels by 2030 through the development of technological capacities that have the highest value added and multiplier effect on the domestic economy. The aim of this analysis is to identify possible capacities with domestic production sites based on the availability of raw materials and technological capabilities (existing and possible) and to identify stakeholders, needs and barriers to the development of the advanced fuel market.  Development, adoption and implementation of the Plan and Programme for the production and use of biofuels in transport. The plan is based on the adapted legislative framework (OIE-4 and TR-5) and the results of the analysis in item 1. The plan will set out a policy to promote the production and use of advanced biofuels in transport in the Republic of Croatia. The plan will include an immediate review and assessment of the state of the biofuels market, new business models, stakeholders, measures to promote increased production and use of advanced biofuels in transport, and a trajectory to achieve the goal of advanced fuels in transport by 2030. The measures prescribed by the plan will include measures aimed at the production of advanced biofuels from raw materials under Part A of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources, measures for the use of advanced biofuels, R&D measures, market strengthening, administrative measures. The plan will help attract the announced investments for a zero-pollution Europe.   Establishment of a model for the promotion and development of the advanced biofuel transport market by the Ministry, including the establishment of financial support through existing programmes (e.g. Rural Development Programme, HAMAG-BICRO, BBI JU) for advanced biofuel projects   Funds needed for implementation: The competent ministries (MEE, Ministry of Agriculture) plan to finance the implementation of these activities within its annual budgets as an integral part of its regular activities. Cost of analysis from item 1: HRK 1 million. Funding Sources: State budget (competent ministries), EU funds  Executive body: MEE in cooperation with the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Economy and Entrepreneurship and Ministry of Finance  Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: MEE Effect: Accelerating the development of the advanced fuel market and increasing the share of RES in final energy consumption in transport and reducing transport emissions. Reducing the carbon footprint of bioeconomy stakeholders.  Tracking method: Reports on RES quantity placed on the market in the transport sector  Research and development: In order to achieve this objective, it is necessary to improve existing and develop new technologies for the production of advanced fuels in transport, as well as new business models for increasing the use of advanced biofuels.  Connection with other dimensions: The measure can be linked primarily to the dimensions of 3) energy security and 5) research on innovation and competitiveness.  133  The connection with climate change adaptation: The development of the advanced fuel market is planned with the integration of climate change adaptation measures and the strengthening of resilience and / or reduction of market vulnerability to climate change