165  3.4 Dimension internal energy market  3.4.1 Electricity Infrastructure i. Policies and measures to achieve the targeted level of interconnection referred to in Article 4 (d) As stated in section 2.3, with regard to further increase of cross-border capacity by 2030, no specific requirements are set. The possible construction of new interconnections will depend on market opportunities and positive cost-benefit analyses. Further increase of NTC values at individual borders will be achieved by planned removal of restrictions on the internal network. The economic operator is HOPS, and investments in internal grid enhancements are approved by CERA. ii. Regional cooperation in this area  Described in the context of regional cooperation in the "energy security" dimension.  3.4.2 Energy transmission infrastructure iii. Financial measures in this area at the national level, including EU support and the use of EU funds, if applicable. Described in the context of financial measures in the "energy security" dimension.  i. Policies and measures relating to the elements of section 2.4.2, including, where applicable, specific measures to facilitate the implementation of Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) and other key infrastructure projects. UET-1: Development of the electricity transmission network Financial measure; implementation 2021 - 2030 Objective and description of the measure: The Croatian Transmission System Operator d.o.o. (hereinafter: HOPS) is, according to the Energy Act (OG 120/12; 14/14; 95/15; 102/15, 68/16), the energy entity responsible for management, operation and governance, maintenance, development and construction of the electricity transmission grid. Pursuant to the Electricity Market Act (OG 22/13, 95/15 and 102/15, 68/18, 52/19), HOPS, as the owner of the 110 kV to 400 kV transmission grid, shall be obliged to produce and adopt, with the prior consent of the Croatian Energy Regulatory Agency (hereinafter: CERA), ten-year, three-year and one-year investment plans for the development of the transmission grid. 10-year development plans are updated annually. At the time of adoption of this document, the 10-Year Transmission Grid Development Plan 2019--2028, detailing the initial three-year and one-166  year periods approved by CERA in July 2019. The plan will be continuously updated throughout the implementation period of this document. Activities: according to the 10-Year Transmission Grid Development Plan Funds needed for implementation: 8 billion  Funding Sources: electricity transmission fee; participation of new users in creating technical conditions in the grid for connection of their plants; EU funds (Structural, Innovation and Modernization Fund)  Executive body: HOPS  Monitoring body: MEE  Effect: safe and reliable operation of the transmission grid  Monitoring method: reports to CERA  Connection to other dimensions: decarbonisation - RES, energy efficiency, energy security  Note: In addition to the financial resources necessary to cover the costs of the construction of the transmission grid, it is also necessary to secure funds for the balancing of the system (through the balancing mechanism and partly through the electricity transmission fee), or for the procurement of part of the ancillary services of the system (primarily frequency and power regulation), which can be preliminarily estimated at the amount of HRK 375 to 425 million per year, and the funds needed for redispatching production facilities to eliminate periodic restrictions in the transmission grid. UET-2: Development of the gas transport network Financial measure; implementation 2021 - 2030 Objective and description of the measure: Planning for the development of the transmission system is carried out through the development of a 10-Year Gas Transmission Grid Development Plan, the development of which is the obligation of the gas transmission system operator pursuant to the Gas Market Act (OG 18/18). The gas transmission system operator is Plinacro d.o.o. 10-Year Gas Transmission Grid Development Plans are updated annually and approved by CERA. At the time of adoption of this document, the 10-Year Gas Transmission Grid Development Plan of the Republic Croatia 2018-2027 was relevant. The plan will be continuously updated throughout the implementation period of this document. Activities: according to the 10-Year Transmission Grid Development Plan Funds needed for implementation: 8 billion  Financing sources:  Executive body: Plinacro  Monitoring body: MEE  Effect: safe and reliable operation of the gas transmission system  Monitoring method: reports to CERA  Connection to other dimensions: decarbonisation - RES, energy efficiency, energy security  ii. Regional cooperation in this area  Due to the fact that the energy transmission infrastructure of the Republic of Croatia is connected to the systems of neighbouring countries, full technical and operational compliance with the operators of those systems is required, which is regulated by the relevant documents. 167  It is planned to integrate the Croatian gas transmission system with the gas transmission systems of all neighbouring countries comprehensively, and already in the preparatory phase of interconnection projects, the gas transmission system operator is intensively cooperating with the transmission system operators of those countries. Other opportunities for regional cooperation in the context of energy transmission infrastructure are described in the framework of regional cooperation in the energy security dimension.  iii. Financial measures in this area at the national level, including EU support and the use of EU funds, if applicable. Described in the context of financial measures in the "energy security" dimension.  3.4.3 Market integration i. Policies and measures relating to the elements referred to in Section 2.4.3. The legislative and institutional framework for achieving the defined objectives of cross-border market integration is adequate and no specific measures need to be implemented. The activities initiated by the Transmission System Operator (HOPS) and the Electricity Exchange (CROPEX) through IBWT and EU XBID projects are expected to continue. The course and speed of implementation of regional market integration in Southeast Europe will depend on the readiness of institutions in neighbouring countries, especially in neighbouring non-EU countries (Serbia and BiH). Market integration will also significantly contribute to the goal of increasing the competitiveness and liquidity of the wholesale market. The non-discriminatory legal framework and the independence of the transmission system operator, with adequate oversight by regulators, are crucial for increasing the number of market participants and competitiveness in the area of supply. Additional measures and activities need to be taken to enable the active participation of end consumers (customers) and other grid users in the electricity market, in particular in the provision of flexibility services.  ii. If applicable, measures to increase the flexibility of the energy system with regard to the production of energy from renewable sources, including the introduction of intraday pairing of markets and cross-border balancing markets Contributing to this objective is the measure ES-6: Construction and use of energy storage facilities.   168  iii. Measures to ensure priority access and delivery of electricity produced from renewable energy sources or high efficiency cogeneration and prevention of limitation or redistribution of such electricity  Contributing to this objective is the measure UET-1 Development of the electricity transmission grid. iv. Policies and measures to protect consumers, especially vulnerable and, where applicable, energy poor consumers, and to improve the competitiveness and contestability of the retail energy market The vulnerable consumer protection measure (UET-5) is elaborated in Chapter 3.4.4. UET-3 is envisaged as a measure to strengthen competitiveness. v. Description of measures to enable and develop demand response including those addressing tariffs to support dynamic pricing  UET-3: Elaboration of a regulatory framework for active participation of customers in the electricity market Regulatory measure; implementation: 2020 - 2022 Objective and description of the measure: In order to enable the active role of grid users in the electricity market, the existing regulatory framework should be appropriately amended, in particular by introducing an aggregator as a market player and by facilitating the launch of ancillary service pilot projects. Pilot projects will analyse in detail the services that users can provide to the distribution or transmission system operator. The possible types, extent, manner and period of the provision of ancillary services will be analysed. Obstacles to the use of ancillary services will be identified and ways to remove them will be suggested. The analysis of the potential to provide ancillary services and flexibility services with demand response will be carried out beforehand, which will define the manner and model of the provision of ancillary services and demand response by grid users. The implementation of this measure will also take into account new technologies (battery tanks, electric vehicle charging stations, etc.), whose wider application also requires the amendment of the regulatory framework. Activities: developing a regulatory framework for new energy markets; developing a regulatory framework for an independent aggregator; developing a regulatory framework for the provision of ancillary services Funds needed for implementation: regular work of state bodies  Funding Sources: /  Executive body: MEE  Monitoring body: MEE  Effect: The emergence of aggregators in energy markets; the emergence of new energy markets  Monitoring method: reports to CERA  Connection to other dimensions: decarbonisation - RES, energy security  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: user involvement; advanced technologies for users; development of RES; energy storage; system flexibility  169  UET-4: Introduction of advanced metering and data management systems In order to enable the further development of energy markets and the active role of energy buyers in energy markets, it is planned to introduce advanced metering devices and systems at the consumption level.  3.4.4 Energy poverty i. If applicable, policies and measures for the achievement of objectives set out in 2.4.4. In order to achieve the objectives set out in 2.4.4, the following measure will be implemented in the period from 2021 to 2030: UET-5: Adoption and implementation of the Programme for energy poverty alleviation Information and financial measures; Implementation 2021 - 2030 Objective and description of the measure: alleviation of energy poverty and its degree of vulnerability; setting up an energy poverty monitoring system Activities: Within the Programme for the reduction of energy poverty, capacity building will be continued through local info centres, and energy poor citizens as well as citizens at risk of energy poverty will be provided with adequate information and advice on energy efficiency measures that contribute to the reduction of energy poverty and on opportunities of co-financing activities in this area. Furthermore, indicators necessary to monitor the energy poverty will be identified and a monitoring system will be established through the already existing system for collecting data on household consumption and habits (Croatian Bureau of Statistics). On the basis of data, a possible extension of criteria for gaining the status of vulnerable energy customers will be analysed. Also, the implementation of energy efficiency measures in energy poor households will be co-financed, such as replacement of household of the efficiency of heating systems and replacement of energy generating products (in particular electricity and fuel oil)) with systems that are environmentally and economically more favourable and more energy-efficient, and above all, with systems that use renewable energy sources, and the implementation of other technical energy efficiency measures will also be co-financed. The programme will elaborate in detail the above-mentioned measures and, if necessary, develop other measures as well as the possibility of their implementation within the energy efficiency obligation system for suppliers. A model to cover energy costs will be developed and implemented within the Programme. The model will determine the level of assistance needed for households facing the problem of meeting energy costs, based on the amount of energy required to meet the minimum standard of living. The Long-term Renovation Strategy (2050) will provide measures to combat energy poverty through the energy renovation of buildings, as well as criteria for identifying vulnerable groups of citizens at risk of energy poverty. These measures will be further elaborated in the Programme of Energy Renovation 170  of Multifamily Housing 2021-2030 and in the Programme of Energy Renovation of Family Houses 2021-2030  Funds needed for implementation: Not estimated  Funding Sources: Energy Efficiency Obligation Scheme payer funds, EU funds  Executive body: the ministry responsible for energy and the ministry responsible for social welfare, CBS  Monitoring (supervisory) bodies: the ministry responsible for energy and the ministry responsible for social welfare  Effect: Establishment of a system for monitoring energy poverty and the vulnerability to it; capacity building to alleviate energy poverty; the establishment of models to cover energy costs; reduction of immediate energy consumption and consequent reduction of CO 2 emissions in energy-poor and at-vulnerable households  Monitoring method: CBS publications; The realized savings are monitored and proven by using bottom-up methods according to the Ordinance on the system for monitoring, measurement and verification of energy savings  Connection to other dimensions: decarbonisation - emissions; decarbonisation - RES; energy efficiency  Connection to climate change adaptation: /  Research and development: energy efficiency in buildings; energy efficiency in heating and cooling; smart cities and communities