3.5  Dimension: research, innovation and competitiveness i. Policies and measures relating to the elements referred to in Section 2.5. The state will increase investment in research, development and innovation, and investment in the transfer of knowledge and technologies and the development of knowledge and innovation based technologies through various programmes from grants, conditional loans to state aid programmes. The introduction of concrete technologies will be driven primarily by the market. A three-year action plan for research, innovation and competitiveness relevant to the dimensions of the Energy Union will be drawn up.  IIK-1: Research, innovation and competitiveness status quo analysis and determining targets, indicators and monitoring system Regulatory measure; implementation: 2020 - 2022-2030  Objective and description of the measure: Elaboration of monitoring objectives and systems, and establishment of a monitoring system for achievements in the field of energy-related research and development, innovation and competitiveness; defining key technologies for low carbon transition, elaborating a three year action plan   Activities: In cooperation with MEEC and MSE, MEE will further elaborate criteria and indicators relevant to the areas of the Energy Union. It will propose relevant data sources and an indicator monitoring system. It will propose key low-carbon transition technologies, monitor the achievement of set goals, and propose corrective and other measures as needed. If necessary, thematic subgroups will be established for areas of research, innovation and competitiveness.  171  Funds needed for implementation: regular work of state bodies Executive body: MEE, MEEC, MSE, CBS, SIPO Monitoring (supervisory) bodies:: MEE Effect: Defined national development goals in the context of low carbon transition, established system for monitoring of implementation, defined key technologies Monitoring method: MEE reports Connection with other dimensions: The measure is linked to all dimensions of the Energy Union as it encourages and monitors research in all areas relevant to the Energy Union Connection to climate change adaptation: Among other topics, the measure encourages and monitors research relevant to climate change adaptation.   IIK-2: Co-financing industrial research and experimental development projects aligned with the National Development Strategy  Financial measure; implementation 2021 --2030  Objective and description of the measure: The measure promotes research and development of products and services relevant to low-carbon development by co-financing research projects under priority topics. Activities: Tenders will be announced on an annual basis for research projects to be carried out within the Republic of Croatia. Co-financing of the participation of Croatian scientific organizations and SMEs in international research projects dealing with priority topics for the Republic of Croatia will be provided. Also, project participation of Croatian scientific institutions and SMEs in relevant programmes (SET Plan, ETIP, EERA, Horizon 2020 LIFE, Eureka, etc.) will be co-financed, European Partnerships under the EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation and in relevant Pan - European networks and consortia, in accordance with the rules of a particular programme. Scientific and research and commercial cooperation will be encouraged and private R&D investment. The number of patents applied for and granted will be monitored. Projects whose objectives are aligned with national priorities will be provided with funding for part of the costs not funded by donor funding. Funds needed for implementation: : approximately HRK 45 million a year  Executive body: CSF, MEE, MSE, MEEC, HAMAG-BICRO  Monitoring (supervisory) bodies:: National Innovation Council Effect: Research and scientific projects of priority for the Republic of Croatia were conducted Monitoring method: MEE reports  Connection with other dimensions: The measure is linked to all dimensions of the Energy Union as it encourages research in all areas relevant to the Energy Union Connection to climate change adaptation: The measure encourages and monitors research relevant to climate change adaptation.   IIK-3: Supporting low carbon entrepreneurship development Financial measure; implementation 2021 --2030 Objective and description of the measure: The measure encourages the development of entrepreneurship in the area of low carbon products and services, by co-financing entrepreneurial activities in this area. Activities: It will continue to support entrepreneurs throughout the development stages of their business - from the research and development of the idea through to commercialization and marketing, all in the area of low carbon products and services. Cooperation with scientific and research institutions and increased private investment in R&D will be encouraged. One 172  possible activity is to fund the Proof of Concept as a mechanism to support the transfer of research results from the public to the private sector to create new products and services. The number of patents applied for and granted and the number of new products will be monitored. Workforce needs and additional workforce qualifications will be monitored, and ongoing communication with government education and employment authorities established. Funds needed for implementation: to be determined subsequently  Executive body: HAMAG-BICRO, MSE, MEEC  Monitoring body: MEE and the Committee for intersectoral coordination for policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change Effect: Low carbon products and services marketed Monitoring method: reports of the Committee for intersectoral coordination for policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change  Connection with other dimensions: The measure is linked to all dimensions of the Energy Union as it encourages entrepreneurship in all areas relevant to the Energy Union Connection to climate change adaptation: The measure encourages entrepreneurship in areas relevant to climate change adaptation.   IIK-4: Supporting knowledge and technology transfer from science to economy with focus on low carbon technologies  Financial measure; implementation 2021 --2030 Objective and description of the measure: The measure encourages the development of established technology transfer offices or related organizational units in public scientific organizations and science and technology parks with the aim of transferring knowledge and developing technologies that will contribute to the development of a low carbon economy.  Activities: Providing annual support to public scientific organizations for the establishment of development companies or subsidiaries resulting from the results of scientific research; providing support for cooperation between entrepreneurs and the science system, business meetings, business consulting; preparation of business plans; pre-money valuation and mentoring the preparation of high value projects and infrastructure projects; mentoring the development of business plans and pitching to investors, financing of experts on protection of intellectual property rights; financing grants for projects in the concept validation phase, etc. with a focus on sustainable technologies that contribute to low carbon development.  The number of collaborations between the systems of science and industry in the field of low carbon technology, the number of business plans prepared; the number of further investments secured after the PoC phase; number of intellectual property rights protection requests submitted; the number of newly established development companies or subsidiaries in the 5 year period since its inception, and business success will be monitored. Also, an invitation will be issued annually for the PoC phase of projects to be implemented by technology transfer offices. Funds needed for implementation: Up to HRK 5 million annually Executive body: MSE Monitoring (supervisory) body: MSE Effect: Low carbon products and services marketed Monitoring method: Reports on the work of technology transfer offices and science and technology parks.   IIK-5: Supporting further work of excellence centres active in the field of natural, technical, biotechnical and biomedical sciences Financial measure; implementation 2021 --2030 173  Objective and description of the measure: The measure encourages the continued work of established Centres of Excellence and those whose work has been positively evaluated in the periodic evaluation process with a view of a further development a low carbon economy.  Activities: Support for industrial and experimental research of scientific Committee for intersectoral coordination for policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change, with a view of further upgrading on the results of research funded in the 2014 financial period.-2020 Funds needed for implementation: to be determined subsequently Executive body: MSE Monitoring (supervisory) bodies:: ASHE  Effect: results of industrial and experimental research in the field of low carbon development Monitoring method: Reports on the work of the CRE, which are submitted annually to the MSE and the ASHE.   IIK-6: Capacity building for stimulating research and innovation and increasing competitiveness in the low carbon economy Information measure; implementation: 2020 - 2030 Objective and description of the measure: Capacities of institutions involved in stimulating and monitoring research, innovation and competitiveness in the low carbon economy will be built Activities: Representatives of all bodies involved in the implementation of measures IIK 1-5 will be supported to participate in lectures, workshops, working group meetings, study tours with the aim of international integration and capacity building in setting goals, defining indicators and monitoring the achievement of set goals in the context research, innovation and competitiveness in the low carbon economy. Support for participation in working bodies and working groups and committees of relevant European and international organizations (IEA, etc.), programmes (SET Plan, ETIP, EERA, Horizon 2020 LIFE, Eureka, etc.), European Partnerships under the EU Framework Programme for the research and innovation in relevant Pan-European networks and consortia. If necessary, the transfer of know-how with other EU Member States and other stakeholders within the Republic of Croatia will be organized.  This activity will also co-finance the participation of scientific organizations in public-public and public-private partnerships within the framework programme for research and technological development and with relevant Pan-European research networks and consortia in the area of low carbon economy. Funds needed for implementation: HRK 50 million / year  Funding sources: technical assistance, funds gained from the auction of emission allowances (EPEEF), ESI funds  Executive body: HAMAG-BICRO, MSE, MEEC  Monitoring body: MEE and the Committee for intersectoral coordination for policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change Effect: Capacities in bodies responsible for stimulating research, innovation and competitiveness in the area of low carbon technologies Monitoring method: reports of the Committee for intersectoral coordination for policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change  Connection to other dimensions: / Connection to climate change adaptation: /     174  ii. Collaboration with other Member States in this area, including information on how the objectives and policies of the Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET) are transposed into the national context  The Republic of Croatia has been included in the steering group of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET-Plan) since 2015 and covers all ten key activities. The link between SET Plan activities at European and national levels will be ensured through capacity building foreseen under measure IIK-6.  At a regional workshop held in Ljubljana in July 2019, as the topic of regional cooperation within the dimension of research, innovation and competitiveness scientific and research cooperation with the possibility of expanding were proposed, regarding the following topics:  energy storage,  digitization of energy systems and grids,  energy communities,  advanced grids,  RES rich systems,  integration of energy systems (electrical, gas, thermal, transport)  removal, storage and use of CO2,  hydrogen,  energy poverty  consumer behaviour. Countries participating in informal regional coordination are considering the proposals made and will agree on next steps. iii.  Financial measures in this area at the national level, including EU support and the use of EU funds Scientific and research project stimulating entrepreneurship will be funded from national, European Structural and Cohesion Funds for the period 2021 - 2027, the Innovation Fund and directly from the European Union budget, with priority given to low carbon projects. In addition, financial support is needed for research projects applying to relevant international tenders, which increase the knowledge needed to create a green and competitive low carbon economy in which resources are used more efficiently and whose objectives are aligned with priority topics. The topics of the projects will be determined in accordance with national priorities, to be determined by the Committee for intersectoral coordination for policy and measures for mitigation of and adaptation to climate change (foreseen under measure MS-1), in cooperation with the competent ministries. Financial support will be provided as a percentage based on own co-financing of projects, for the costs of organizations registered in the Republic of Croatia. The proceeds from the emissions trading will be used for this purpose. 