3.3  Dimension energy security i. Policies and measures relating to the elements referred to in Section 2.3.  Policies and measures relating to the elements referred to in Section 2.3. are classified by sectors: electricity, district heating systems, gas and oil and petroleum products and are presented below. ES-1: Integrated planning of energy security and energy products supply Regulatory measure; implementation: 2021  2030 An umbrella measure to increase energy security is integrated security of supply planning, in the context of all energy products and all energy systems. Integrated planning must be harmonized at local, regional and national levels, and in accordance with energy planning carried out by energy entities for energy infrastructure across the territory of the Republic of 162  Croatia. In addition, integrated planning needs to be aligned with alternative fuel planning and alternative fuel infrastructure. This planning will be carried out as part of the revision of the Integrated Energy and Climate Plan, which must be completed by 23rd June 2023, and in the framework of the preparation and revision of the subsequent plans. To this end, it is necessary to supplement the existing regulatory framework.  ES-2: Construction and use of energy storage facilities Financial measure; implementation 2021 - 2030 In order to increase the energy storage capacity of the system and increase the regulatory capacity of the electricity system, it is planned to build additional reversible power plants with a capacity of 150 MW before 2030, then the development of heat storage tanks for end customers, the development of battery tanks, the introduction of charging stations for electric vehicles that allow energy storage, the development of underground energy storage in the form of compressed gas, and the use of other innovative energy storage technologies (EU-funded). ES-3: Improvement of power system management  Further development of techniques and procedures for managing the electricity system is expected, with the application of a number of modern tools that should enable a high level of automation of the management system, as well as the development of coordination with other transmission system operators in the region and beyond, together with the European coordination centres and communication with other participants of the electricity market. With increasing the share of renewable sources in the structure of electricity production, the need for sufficient regulatory capacity for the purposes of running the electricity system is also increased. It will be of particular relevance to maintain a high level of security of the overall management system in order to prevent cyberattacks that could endanger the electricity system and power supply. The planning will also take into account the risks of extreme weather, which are increased by climate change. District heating system ES-4: Development and maintenance of centralised thermal systems District heating systems have been identified as one of the priorities of the energy policy of the Republic of Croatia. The most significant potential for the development and improvement of existing district heating systems is primarily to increase the energy efficiency of production units, infrastructure and equipment at end-users and to increase reliability and security of energy supply. Therefore, this measure envisages the maintenance and upgrading of existing DHS systems, stopping the trend of disconnecting customers from the DHS systems, introducing heat storage tanks for electricity, and using RES for DHS and replacing existing DHS production with renewable sources (e.g. biofuels) as well as use of heat pumps.  163  Gas ES-5: LNG terminal construction The size of the liquefied natural gas terminal depends on the interest of the market. In the first phase, the construction of the FSRU vessel (Floating Storage Regasification Unit) is planned, whose maximum annual natural gas supply will amount up to 2.6 billion cubic meters. The planned maximum capacity of natural gas supply from the terminal, and indirectly its size and capacity, is conditioned by the maximum capacity of the gas pipeline system that, with the construction of the first part of the evacuation gas pipeline system - -Zlobin gas pipeline, would amount to 7.2 million m3/day. By building an extension of the Zlobin-Kozarac evacuation gas pipeline, the total capacity of the LNG terminal would increase to 12 million m3/d, and by building the Kozarac-Slobodnica gas pipeline, the capacity would increase to 19 million m3/d. It is estimated that the total investment in the first phase of construction of the liquefied natural gas terminal would amount to slightly more than HRK 1.7 billion, and the commissioning is planned for 1st January 2021. ES-6: Gas transport system construction and management improvement This measure envisages construction of new supply routes, interconnections and gas storage facilities in accordance with the 10-Year Transmission Grid Development Plan, which will increase the security of natural gas supply.  Oil and petroleum products  ES-7: Development of the Adriatic oil and derivatives market with oil and derivatives storage capacities optimization In the coming period of the decarbonisation policy of the energy sector, the oil sector will be strongly influenced by an increase in the use of alternative fuels such as biofuels, hydrogen, electricity, etc., as well as an increase in energy efficiency. This will particularly affect the operation of refineries, the transportation and distribution of oil and petroleum products and the storage market. Regardless of the projected reduction in consumption of petroleum products by 2030/2050, their share in total energy consumption will still be significant and their uninterrupted supply needs to be ensured. The establishment and implementation of measures for secure and reliable supply of oil and petroleum products is regulated by the Oil and Petroleum Products Market Act (OG Nos. 19/14, 73/17). One of the important obligations is to continuously maintain and invest in the safety of transportation and storage of oil and petroleum products. It is also necessary to further develop the methodology and tools for assessing the supply security. ES-8: Exploration of potential hydrocarbon deposits in Slavonia, Dinarides and Adriatics For the purpose of preparing the basis for the energy strategy, a projection of oil and gas production by 2050 was made, provided that further investment to replenish reserves is 164  made. Accordingly, it is expected that commercial discoveries will occur that will enter the exploitation stage after 2022, and the full production potential of oilfields will be reached in the period between 2030 and 2035. After 2035, a continued decrease in oil production is expected, that in 2050 would be around 220,000 m3. Similar to oil production, a decrease in natural gas production is expected by 2020, after which an increase in production is expected as a result of the exploitation of new gas fields. An increase in gas production is expected by 2035, after which a decrease in production will occur.  ii. Regional cooperation in this area Regional cooperation in the field of energy security has existed for many years, within which neighbouring countries jointly plan cross-border connections for powerlines, gas pipelines and oil pipelines. The cooperation of transmission system operators has its formal basis in EU regulations and grid rules: the Croatian transmission system operator and operators from all neighbouring countries are part of the same regional security centre, and the cooperation consists of joint implementation of security analyses, capacity calculations, short-term adequacy forecasts and joint supply disruption planning. In accordance with the Regulation on risk preparedness in the electricity sector 2019/941, regional risk preparedness plans will be jointly developed and bilateral measures will be proposed and implemented as necessary. At a regional workshop held in Ljubljana in July 2019, the additional proposed topics for regional cooperation within the energy security dimension were  joint consideration and planning of the construction of new interconnections,  joint consideration and management of RES systems,  joint consideration and management with connected systems. Countries participating in informal regional coordination are considering the proposals made and will agree on next steps. iii. Financial measures in this area at the national level, including EU support and the use of EU funds, if applicable. The use of EU cohesion policy funds, the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF), the Modernisation Fund and the Innovation Fund is expected.  