2.5  Dimension research, innovation and competitiveness i. National objectives and funding targets for public and, where available, private research and innovation relating to the Energy Union, including, where appropriate, a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met By 2020, the Republic of Croatia has committed to increasing its investment in research, development and innovation to 1.4% of GDP. Investment in the science and technology system should steadily increase and ultimately reach the EU average of 3% of GDP at the national level. The Smart Specialization Strategy of the Republic of Croatia, which covers the period until 2020, defines, in addition to five thematic priority areas, two horizontal themes representing cross-sectoral technologies and processes and serving as drivers of growth within the thematic priority areas, the so-called key development technologies and information and communication technology.  Key development technologies enable the transition from a traditional economy to a low carbon economy based on knowledge. They play an important role in the development, innovation and strengthening the competitiveness of the industry, and include biotechnology, micro- and nano-electronics and photonics, and other advanced materials and technologies. Since the Smart Specialization Strategy is one of the basic strategic documents in the field of technological development and innovation, this created the initial preconditions for the transition to a low carbon economy and for the participation of institutions responsible for supporting business investments in research, development and innovation (Ministry of the Economy, Entrepreneurship and Crafts, HAMAG-BICRO). The majority of the funds for the implementation of the Smart Specialization Strategy will be secured from the European Structural and Investment Funds.  It is expected that in the forthcoming financial period the main source of financing will also be ESI funds and funds from auctions of CO 2 emission allowances and ETS funds dedicated for modernization. The revision of the ETS Directive established a financial mechanism to support the modernization of the energy sector and industrial plants for the period 20212030, in the ten 78  EU Member States whose GDP per capita according to market prices was below 60% of the EU average, including the Republic of Croatia (Modernisation Fund). The funds of the Modernisation Fund will be used for investments in: modernization of industrial production, production and use of electricity from renewable sources, improvement of energy efficiency, energy storage and modernization of energy grids, energy efficiency in transport, buildings, agriculture and waste management. The European Union has a leading role in the world in efforts to mitigate climate change and is focusing its economy on low-carbon development based on new technologies. Therefore, the revision of the ETS Directive also establishes the Innovation Fund, which is available to all Member States. It will fund projects to support innovation in low-carbon technologies and processes, environmentally friendly carbon capture and use, innovative technologies for renewables and energy storage. The use of cohesion funds will be programmed on the basis of strategic objectives and key areas of intervention to be defined in the National Development Strategy for the period until 2030, which will be prepared by the end of 2019.  The Republic of Croatia currently has no defined national goals for financing public and private research and innovation related to the Energy Union. Therefore, national goals, indicators needed to monitor the achievement of goals and data sources will be defined by the Committee for Intersectoral Coordination for Policies and Measures for Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation (envisaged by measure MS-1), in cooperation with the MEE, the National Competitiveness Council, the MSE and the MEEC. ii. Where available, national 2050 objectives related to the promotion of clean energy technologies and, where appropriate, national objectives, including long-term targets (2050) for deployment of low-carbon technologies, including for decarbonising energy and carbon-intensive industrial sectors and, where applicable, for related carbon transport and storage infrastructure The Republic of Croatia has no specific national goals for 2050 for the implementation of low carbon technologies other than those set out in other parts of this document. The introduction of specific technologies should primarily be market driven. The state will increase investment in research, development and innovation, and investment in the transfer of knowledge and technologies and the development of knowledge and innovation based technologies through various programmes - from grants, conditional loans to state aid programmes.  The following areas with most significant capacities of both industry and scientific community have been identified: - development of new and improvement of existing primary and secondary equipment for power system (primary equipment: turbines, generators, motors, transformers, switches, power lines and cables, secondary energy equipment: control, measurement, protection, supervision, management) - new technologies and improvements related to power plants, substations, components and systems related to renewable energy sources 79  - new research related to increasing the efficiency and production capacity of industrial, agricultural and forestry plants and machinery - advanced energy storage systems - diagnostics and better management of energy equipment - energy management systems for planning, investment, real-time management and monitoring energy efficiency and reducing CO 2 emissions  - systems for energy management and support to functioning of the energy market at the levels of microgrids, advanced grids and smart cities - advanced conventional energy solutions - application of advanced grids and complex energy systems - energy-efficient lighting - sustainable conversion of biomass into energy - biogas technologies for electricity and heat generation - systems for CO2 capture, transport, use and storage.  iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to competitiveness Competitiveness is a broad issue that goes beyond the scope of the National Energy and Climate Plan. The National Competitiveness Council, which acts as an advisory body and brings together representatives of the economy, government, trade unions, science and education, operates in seven priority areas, namely:  Education for growth and development  EU-compliant rule of law  Cost and price competitiveness  Development of innovation and technology  Strengthening small and medium-sized enterprises  Regional development and cluster development  Creating a positive attitude and leadership. The objective of this Council is to make the Republic of Croatia one of the 40 most competitive economies in the world. Croatia is currently ranked 60th out of a total of 63 global economies, up one position from the previous year, 2018 [16].  The Republic of Croatia currently has no defined national goals for competitiveness related to the Energy Union. Therefore, national goals, indicators needed to monitor the achievement of goals and data sources will be defined by the Committee for Intersectoral Coordination for Policies and Measures for Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation (envisaged by measure MS-1). The MEE will establish a system for monitoring the achievement of goals.  