2.3  Dimension energy security i. The elements set out in point (c) of Article 4  The most important objective within the dimension of energy security is to ensure a lasting, secure and quality supply of all energy-generating products. In order to achieve this objective, it is necessary to introduce integral and systematic planning of supply of all energy-generating products and forms of energy. Other national energy security objectives are:  diversification of supply routes of energy and energy-generating products  increasing gas and energy storage capacity in the energy system  increasing the flexibility (and thus resilience) of energy systems  protection of critical infrastructure and mitigating risks related to cyber security and climate change. In terms of gas supply security, it is necessary to ensure domestic operational security of gas supply as well as the security of gas delivery. Croatia is currently supplied with gas from domestic production and from imports through the Slovenian and Hungarian delivery routes, and peak demand is met through supply from the underground gas storage facility Okoli. One of the objectives in the context of energy security is to increase the capacity of gas storage facilities, diversify supply routes and fulfil obligations of security of supply according to the infrastructure standard (N-1 criterion) pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply.  In order to maintain the security of natural gas supply, it is in the interest of the Republic of Croatia to ensure the realization of the liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal project on the island of Krk in accordance with the Energy Development Strategy of the Republic of Croatia, the Natural Gas Storage Strategy of the European Union and the Energy Security Strategy of the European Union. The realization of the LNG terminal project on the island of Krk will provide a new delivery route for natural gas and will diversify the natural gas supply routes and sources on the markets of the Republic of Croatia and European Union, which will significantly affect the security of natural gas supply. For the purposes of diversification of gas supply routes, in addition to the construction of the LNG terminal, it is planned to connect to the Ionian Adriatic gas pipeline. For the purposes of diversification of electricity supply routes, construction of interconnectors to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Hungary and Serbia is being considered. 66  For the purposes of increasing the gas storage capacity, it is planned to develop a gas storage system (extension of existing storage facilities and construction of a new underground storage facility). Energy storage within the power system will be enabled by the construction of pumped-storage power plants, which will also provide greater system flexibility and greater integration of variable renewable energy sources, primarily the sun and wind. In addition to energy storage, the possibility of participation of demand response in the operation of the power system will also contribute to system flexibility. ii. National objectives with regard to increasing: the diversification of energy sources and supply from third countries for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems Increasing the share of RES in the structure of used energy-generating products will contribute to reducing dependence on imports, including imports from third countries. Also, in order to reduce imports of energy-generating products from third countries, potential hydrocarbon deposits in Slavonia, the Dinarides and the Adriatic should be explored.   iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to reducing energy import dependency from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems  Power sector National goals regarding the security of electricity supply are as follows:  creating a favourable investment climate for investments in new electricity generation facilities and revitalization of existing facilities in order to reduce the dependence on electricity imports from the market, increasing the competitiveness of power plants located in the territory of the country and for the purposes of increasing possibilities for electricity generation in the territory of the country and relieving the grids.  construction of different types of power plants with respect to the characteristics of the system as a whole (basic, regulation-peak, other), for the purposes of proper technical functioning of the power system as a whole and ensuring sufficient reserves for balancing production and consumption of electricity at all times (short period),  diversification of power plants according to the types of primary energy-generating product used, in order to avoid major disruptions in electricity generation during periods of unavailability of particular primary energy-generating products,  timely implementation of investment plans of the transmission and distribution system operators with regulatory supervision, in order to avoid disruptions in customer supply during grid failures,  implementation of energy efficiency measures to reduce electricity consumption, in order to reduce electricity demand, and  construction of distributed power sources with a medium-voltage and low-voltage grid connection near the point of consumption in order to further increase the power generation capacity in the territory of the country and relieve stress on grids. 67  Gas sector The basic framework for regulating the security of natural gas supply in the Republic of Croatia is stipulated by Regulation No. 1938/2017 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply and repealing Regulation (EU) No. 994/2010. This Regulation aims to ensure that all necessary measures are undertaken to safeguard an uninterrupted gas supply, in particular supply to protected customers in the event of difficult climatic conditions or disruptions in gas supply.  Regulation 1938/2017 entered into force on 1st November 2017, and the purpose of the Regulation is to increase solidarity and trust among Member States and to establish measures needed to achieve those objectives by cost-effective measures and in a way that will not destabilize gas markets. The main improvements in relation to the previous Regulation 994/2010 are: - introduction of the solidarity mechanism, according to which, in the event of a serious crisis situation, neighbouring member states will assist in ensuring supply to households and key public services, - strengthening regional cooperation through regional risk groups, and joint assessment of security risks and agreed joint preventive and crisis measures, and  - greater transparency through the introduction of an obligation of disclosure to the competent body of the contract between the supplier and customer covering 28% or more of annual gas consumption on the national market. In accordance with the provisions of the Gas Market Act, gas market participants are responsible for the security of gas supply within the scope of their activity. The competent body responsible for the implementation of measures listed in Regulation 1938/2017 is the ministry responsible for energy, which has the following tasks: - monitoring the ratio of supply and demand on the gas market, - preparing estimates of future consumption and available supply, - planning the construction and development of additional capacity of the gas system and - proposing and undertaking measures in the event of a crisis situation. Regional self-government units are responsible for: - monitoring the ratio of gas supply and demand in their area, - preparing estimates of future consumption and available supply, - planning the construction of additional capacity and development of the distribution system in their area and - proposing and undertaking measures within their competence as established by law. Furthermore, Regulation (EU) 1938/2017 establishes the obligation of competent institutions to prepare: - preventive action plans with measures to eliminate and mitigate the identified risks, 68  - emergency plans with measures to remove or mitigate the effects of gas supply disruptions. In order to define a preventive action plan with measures to remove and mitigate the identified risks, in accordance with the risk assessment carried out pursuant to Article 9 of Regulation (EU) 994/2010 and an emergency plan with measures to remove or mitigate the effects of gas supply disruptions in accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EU) 994/2010, the Government of the Republic of Croatia adopted the Emergency Plan on measures to safeguard the security of gas supply of the Republic of Croatia (OG No. 78/14), which, among other things, defines obligations of the gas storage system operator regarding security of supply (e.g. to ensure maximum capacity of gas storage facility before the heating season). In order to identify the criteria for acquiring the protected customer status and protection measures with the aim of reliable supply of protected customers, the Government of the Republic of Croatia adopted the Regulation on criteria for acquiring the status of protected customer in conditions of crisis situations in gas supply (OG No. 65/15). Preventive action plans and emergency plans prepared in accordance with Regulation 994/2010 shall remain in force until new preventive action plans and emergency plans are prepared in accordance with Regulation 1938/2017. According to Regulation (EU) 1938/2017, preventive measures for security of supply also include diversification of natural gas supply routes and sources, and the realization of the LNG terminal project on the island of Krk has been identified as the key measure to diversify natural gas supply routes and sources. In order to ensure this measure, in accordance with the LNG Terminal Act (OG No. 57/18), CERA may issue a decision determining the amount and method of collecting the fee for security of supply upon request of the transmission system operator and upon proposal of the LNG terminal operator. The transmission system operator collects the fee for security of supply and directs the funds to the LNG terminal operator. Heating sector It is necessary to ensure the role of the heating sector for meeting heating needs. For this purpose, it is desirable to introduce zoning in the heating sector, as has already been done in other EU Member States.  Oil sector The establishment and implementation of measures for secure and reliable supply of oil and petroleum products is regulated by the Oil and Petroleum Products Market Act (OG Nos. 19/14, 73/17). On the basis of the aforementioned Act, the Emergency Plan in the event of an extraordinary disruption in the oil and petroleum products market supply was adopted (OG No. 111/12). The Emergency Plan defines: 69   procedures and criteria for identifying an extraordinary disruption of the oil and petroleum products market supply,  competences and responsibilities in case of supply disruption,  procedures for normalization of the oil and petroleum products market supply and  procedures in the event of an international decision on the release of compulsory stocks of oil and petroleum products on the market. Apart from creating and holding compulsory stocks in order to increase the security of supply, the objective is a continuous analysis of the oil sector, both in terms of market supply and existing and future consumption, for the purposes of timely assessment of possible risks related to supply security. Furthermore, item 1 of Article 1 of the Oil and Petroleum Products Market Act, which regulates the rules and measures for the secure and reliable transportation of oil and petroleum products and the storage of oil and petroleum products, imposes the obligation of continuous maintenance and investment in the security of transport and storage of oil and petroleum products. It is also necessary to further develop the methodology and tools for assessing the supply security. iv. National objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular by means of deploying domestic energy sources, demand response and energy storage According to the goal of implementing the energy transition, total energy consumption by 2050 is reduced by about 16% compared to 2017. Own supply capacity first increases to 55.2% in 2030, and decreases to 51.7% in 2050.   Figure 2-10. Total energy consumption and own supply capacity The estimates show a strong increase in the share of variable RES (wind farms and solar plants), and in the period until 2030, anticipate activities aimed at increasing the flexibility of the system that will be ensured from existing and planned impoundment hydroelectric power 70  plants, existing and planned reversible hydroelectric power plants, battery systems at the system and consumption level, gas plants, organizing a balancing market (for the supply of services from domestic sources and other systems; introducing balancing responsibilities for market participants, etc.), improving forecasts of production from variable RES, enhancing transmission grid elements and developing advanced grid systems and system management. The analyses performed so far suggest that up to the integration level of around 1,000 MW, major interventions in the transmission grid in terms of construction of new mains and substations will not be required (for higher levels of integration, HOPS plans to apply the principle of "zone connection"), but the requirements for the balancing mechanism and providing ancillary services of secondary and/or fast tertiary regulating reserve (power and frequency regulation) are significantly increasing. Oil sector Exploration of new deposits and hence increasing hydrocarbon production from domestic sources is one of the key factors for increasing domestic oil and gas supply capacity. The figures below show the existing production of oil, condensate and natural gas, and provide production estimates from existing fields and new production as a result of additional investments in the exploration of new hydrocarbon reserves 2.  Figure 2-11. Oil and condensate production estimate by 2050  71   Figure 2-12. Natural gas production estimate by 2050