83  2.3. Dimension energy security 2.3.1. ii. National objectives with regard to increasing: the diversification of energy sources and supply from third countries for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems Cyprus is a small isolated energy system, with high dependency on oil products for its energy needs. More than 90% of Cyprus energy inland consumption is from oil products and the rest is from renewables. The introduction of natural gas via Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) imports, the development of the necessary infrastructure to import natural gas to Cyprus by end the current energy isolation, contribute to the security of supply dimension and the diversific (for a more detailed description see 2.4.1, and 2.4.2.i).  Cyprus imports around 2.5 million MT per year (2018) of refined oil products, while most of them are imported from neighbouring countries, e.g. Greece and Israel. The possibility to diversify the current energy supply is very limited because of the small amounts of petroleum products that are imported to Cyprus due to the size of its internal market, the lower transport (shipping) costs from neighbouring countries and the availability of petroleum products with the required specifications due to similar climatic conditions. The Cyprus Government decided the relocation of the oil, including liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), terminals as well as other related facilities from the seafront of Larnaca area. Based on that decision and following the decision to develop the necessary infrastructure for LNG import, the New Energy and Industrial Area of Vasilikos was established on November of 2014. The relocation of the oil products except LPG is expected to be completed in the first quarter of 2020 and that of LPG around the end of 2020 early 2021. The modern and upgraded larger oil storage facilities will contribute to security of supply, since larger quantities of petroleum products would be stored on the island as it will also be possible to unload larger ships. Alongside with the abovementioned procedures, the Cyprus Organization for the Storage and Management of Oil Stocks (KODAP), the Central (N.149(I)/2003), is planning to build its own oil storage terminal to the Energy and Industrial Area of Vasilikos in order to relocate its own oil stocks which are held abroad and in private terminals in Cyprus, as well as, to reduce the annual storage cost. For this project, KODAP of security of supply since the majority of the oil stocks will now be kept on the island. 84  2.3.2. iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to reducing energy import dependency from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems It is not applicable. Cyprus imports oil products from neighbouring countries (See 2.3.ii.) 2.3.3. iv. National objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular by means of deploying domestic energy sources, demand response and energy storage The use of indigenous sources of energy, such as hydrocarbon deposits and RES will contribute to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system and ensuring the security of energy supply. The promotion of RES and objectives regarding demand response and energy storage are included in sections 2.1.2 and 2.4.3, respectively.  Regarding indigenous hydrocarbon deposits offshore Cyprus, the Aphrodite natural gas field contractor and the Republic of Cyprus have completed discussions on the Aphrodite Field Development and Production Plan (AFDPP), which was approved. As a result, an Exploitation License for the production of the Aphrodite Field has been issued in November 2019. According to the AFDPP, natural gas production is expected to begin in 2025. The Aphrodite Field gas, is going to be transmitted to Egypt via a subsea pipeline, mainly to Idku LNG Terminal for liquefaction and re-export, as well as for the domestic market.  In February 2018, the ENI / Total joint venture completed the first exploratory well "Calypso 1" in Block 6, which resulted in a gas discovery. Moreover, in February 2019, the ExxonMobil/ Qatar Petroleum Consortium discovered a gas reservoir in their Glaucus-1 well in Block 10. Finally, hydrocarbons exploration activities in Cyprus Exclusive Economic Zone are ongoing and a number of exploration wells are planned for the next two years, with the aim to discover more hydrocarbons