3.5. Dimension research, innovation and competitiveness 3.5.1. i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.5 Existing policies and measures   National funds that promote research in energy and climate, and the development by businesses innovative products and services i.e. RESTART 2016-2020 and Grant Scheme to Enhance Business Innovation.  EU Competitive funds i.e. Horizon 2020 and Life.  European Territorial Cooperation Programs i.e. Cross-Border Cooperation Program Greece - Cyprus 2014-2020 and Transnational Cooperation Program Balkan- Mediterranean 2014-2020.  Council of Ministers decision of the 24th of October 2018 (Decision No. 86.012) foresees that the Technical Committee of the NECP will utilize the technical knowledge of the 152  Cypriot Climate-KIC network, which is a European knowledge and innovation community, working to accelerate the transition to a zero-carbon economy. Supported by the European Institute of Innovation and Technology, it identifies and supports innovation that helps society mitigate and adapt to climate change. Climate - KIC accelerates climate innovation across Europe by connecting the established Climate-KIC innovation hubs, currently in nine countries, which in turn act as a bridge into a pan -European network. Partners in Cyprus are the Cyprus University of Technology, Cyprus Energy Agency and Chrysalis LEAP who are committed to making the country a hub for cleantech innovation in the region. Activities such as a start-up acceleration program or the Journey summer school focus on promoting the nascent innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem in Cyprus.  Business4Climate has developed by Cyprus Employers and Industrialists Federation (OEB) in collaboration with Cyprus University of Technology, the Department of Environment and funded by the Climate - KIC. The aim of this initiative is to commit more than 250 companies from all sectors of economic activity in Cyprus to reduce their emissions by at least 8% by 2030. Within this framework, companies are expected to implement energy saving and renewable energy measures that will reduce their operating costs and make them more competitive.  A new Governance System for R&I which establishes the National Board for Research and Innovation (NBRI), the Chief Scientist, and Ministry R&I coordinator. NBRI is the principal advisory body for defining R&I strategy, under the President of the Republic. The mission of the Chief Scientist is to coordinate and guide the national R&I governance system at policy level. Each Ministry appoints a R&I coordinator from existing personnel as a central point of communication for science, research and innovation topics. A Committee of R&I Coordinators is created, where all Ministry R&I Coordinators participate under the chairmanship of the Chief Scientist. The Committee provides a forum for communication, coordination and cooperation among the Ministry R&I Coordinators aiming to coordinate and align national sectoral policies and activities relating to R&I, and to address inter-departmental and bi-ministerial subjects.  centres of excellence through coupling of leading scientific institutions. Council of Ministers decision of the 9th of finance any possible proposals that will be selected under Horizon 2020 for receiving financial support to implement the future centres of excellence.   Amendment of the legal framework regarding the operation of public universities that will allow them to transform scientific knowledge to commercial products and services. Planned policies and measures  Fund of Funds (sees paragraph 3.2 iv). Support schemes to promote energy efficiency investments in agricultural sector (sees paragraph 3.2 iv).  New Industrial Policy which seeks to achieve sustainable development and production through upgrading energy efficiency and integrating RES in production and industrial infrastructure. The list of proposed measures includes the participation of the sector in 153  participation of the sector in voluntary agreements like Business4Climate and a technical and financial study on the feasibility to use waste of industrial areas for electricity production. New Industrial Policy which seeks to improve industrial R&I infrastructure by creating patents. Additionally, it is foreseen the creation of a Technology Transfer Centre for enhancing cooperation between industry, academia, and research community to develop new innovative commercial products and services.   Establishment of the Deputy Ministry of Innovation and Digital Transformation. The operation of the proposed institution will help to optimally coordinate activities to promote modernization, notably through the integration of information technologies and research and innovation, in which the Deputy Ministry will gather all relevant responsibilities, which are currently exercised fragmented by different departments and services.  European Structural and Investment Funds in the new Programming Period 2021  2027: Under the "Greener low carbon Europe" thematic priority, actions to promote energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources will be promoted. It expected that 30% of the resources available from the European Regional Development allocated to the above thematic priority.  Revision of national funds regarding research and innovation with the aim to boost climate and energy priorities taking into consideration the update of Smart Specialisation Strategy and the NECP. Policies and Measures that would be examined in the view of achieving the carbon emission goal for 2030 These measures will be examined up to the next review of NECP and their implementation will depend on their technical and financial feasibility, their impact on national goals, as well as stakeholders feedback and engagement.  Streamlining funds for R&D in energy and climate and optimize results As a result of the stakeholder consultation process (section 2.5), the need for ringfenced research and innovation funds in energy and climate has clearly emerged. It is proposed that a National Energy and Climate Fund (NECF) is set up. Climate  KIC is proposing an annual Innovation mentioned elsewhere), made available from the trade of emission allowances from the ETS sector. With a dedicated administrator and team, the NECF will be committed to the setting of specific energy and climate R&I goals, targets and KPIs in a coherent R&I Plan; monitoring the progress of the R&I actions; reviewing and updating, as required, the R&I Plan; and to the overall management of the NECF and reporting to the relevant Ministerial Committee of the NECP.  154  Based on the feedback obtained from stakeholders, the R&I Plan developed and supported by the NECF will comprise of sub-pillars which correspond to the main findings of the Figure 3.3 and Table 3.13). It should be noted that the sectors/actions will be constantly updated based on annual evaluations. Adaptation to climate change and the implementation of Nature-Based Solutions are cross-cutting themes that will be applied horizontally across sub-pillars and funding calls.  Fiscally neutral green tax reform (see paragraph 3.2 iv)  Figure 3.3: Suggested National Energy and Climate Fund Table 3.13: Suggested R&I activities and budget allocation of the National Energy and Climate Fund Action Description Annual Budget  Policy Drafting Vision Setting, Research Mapping, Positioning Cyprus to the Global Market, Future trends, etc. 0.25 Clustering Assisting the Business Development of Research Groups in Cyprus (not research funding) 0.75 Non-ETS Sector Assisting all kinds of enterprises and organisations, both in the manufacturing and in the services sectors (including municipalities) reduce their emissions 1 Special Calls with the Cyprus Research and Innovation Foundation (CyRIF) Special calls for the NECP pillars, for research and innovation at different maturity levels (i.e. Circular Economy, Adaptation)  CyRIF to manage, funded by NECF 2 Pilot Projects Mature technologies (pre-commercialization) to pilot in Cyprus. Low levels of co-funding by NECF (25-30%). 2 155  Problem Owner (i.e. Municipality) co-funded specific calls. What IF? Calls Fund technologies that are too risky to be funded by other calls, but that if successful, can reduce at least 1% of Global CO2 emissions, if they achieve 100% penetration 1 3.5.2. ii. Where applicable, cooperation with other Member States in this area, including, where appropriate, information on how the SET Plan objectives and policies are being translated to a national context SET Plan is the pillar of EU energy and climate policy research and innovation, contributing to the structure of European and national research programs and stimulating significant investments in low carbon technologies. The European Technology Priorities, grouped according to the main objective of the Energy Union under the SET, are as follows: (a) Becoming world number one in renewables (b) Delivering a smart consumer-centric energy system  (c) Developing and strengthen energy efficient systems (d) Diversify and strengthen energy options for sustainable transport (e) Driving the ambition of carbon capture, use and storage (f) Increase safety in the use of nuclear energy Cypriot Universities and research institutions participate in the Temporary Working Group of ten SET Implementation Plans of:  (a) Solar PV (b) Concentrated Solar Power (c) Ocean Energy (d) Smart Solutions for Energy Consumers (e) Towards Positive Energy Districts for Sustainable Urbanization (f) Energy Systems (g) Energy Efficiency in Industry (h) Renewable Fuels and Bioenergy (i) Geothermal Energy (j) Energy Efficiency in Buildings Work on further aligning national research funds for the period 2021-2030 with the SET-Plan is ongoing.  Cooperation with other MS is mainly materialized through programs funded by Horizon 2020, Interreg MED (see Appendix 6). 3.5.3. iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds  RESTART 2016-2020 has as a vision to promote the Research, Technological Development and Innovation sector, as a key contributor to the economic development 156  of Cyprus by contributing to addressing key economic and social challenges and developing the conditions for sustainable development, in line with the principles outlined in the Europe 2020 strategic framework for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. RESTART 2016 - 2020 sets energy as a priority area based on the outcomes of Smart Specialization Strategy. At the same time, it is part of the Operational Program "Competitiveness and Sustainable Development 2014 - 2020", the Cyprus Development Strategy for the utilization of the ERDF resources under Priority Axis 1 "Enhancing the ed by ERDF. RESTART 2016-2020 has been designed and is managed by Research and Innovation Foundation.  The Grant Scheme to Enhance Business Innovation supports existing, start-ups and other businesses investing in research and innovation to develop competitive innovative products and services that they plan to make available in the market, as well as innovative processes and processes in production of their products. The Scheme is co-funded by ERDF, it is part of the Operational Program "Competitiveness and Sustainable Development 2014-2020", the Cyprus Development Strategy for the utilization of the ERDF resources under Priority Axis 1 "Enhancing the Competitiveness of the Economy".   Horizon 2020 has the general objective to contribute in building a society and an economy based on knowledge and innovation across the Union by leveraging additional research, development and innovation funding and by contributing to attaining research and development targets, including the target of 3 % of GDP for research and development across the Union by 2020. It shall thereby support the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy and other Union policies, as well as the achievement and functioning of the European Research Area (ERA). Cyprus has so far, managed to secure   The general objective of LIFE is to contribute to the implementation, updating and development of EU environmental and climate policy and legislation by co-financing LIFE Programme continues to finance actions for nature, environment and climate. For the 2014-  the programming period 2014-Objective of European Territorial Cooperation, which supports cross-border, transnational and interregional cooperation programs. During 2014-2020, Cyprus will be participating in the following European Territorial Cooperation Programs: a) Cross-Border Cooperation Program Greece - Cyprus 2014-2020 b) Transnational Cooperation Program MED 2014-2020  Interreg V-B MED c) Transnational Cooperation Program Balkan-Mediterranean 2014-2020  Interreg V  B Balkan Med d) Cross-Border Cooperation Program Mediterranean Basin ENI Med 2014-2020 e) Interregional Cooperation Program INTERREG EUROPE 2014-2020 f) Program for Sustainable Urban Development URBACT III g) European Spatial Planning Observation Network ESPON 2020 157  The following table provides information about the energy and climate related projects that have been funded up to now by the abovementioned financing measures. Appendix 6 provides a detailed list of the programs funded by EU competitive funds related to research in energy and climate for the period 2014  2020. Table 3.14: Energy and climate projects funded up to now by the financing measures in Cyprus Program Public funding million) Private funding million) RESTART 2016-2020 14 - Grant Scheme to Enhance Business Innovation 1.84 1.84 Horizon 2020 23.71 - LIFE - - European Territorial Cooperation 2.3 -  