3.3. Dimension energy security 3.3.1. i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.3 Import of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) Following the completion of a feasibility study in 2016, the Government of Cyprus (GoC) decided to proceed with a policy which will result in the import of Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) in Cyprus market, by approving the import of LNG to Cyprus in a manner leading to the commencement of natural gas supply to Cyprus. The LNG import route shall act as the single gas supply route until the indigenous gas sources become available for the Cyprus market, and will serve as an alternative supply route, for ensuring the security of inland gas supply. As per the above, a tender was announced by ETYFA (Natural Gas Infrastructure Company) in October 2018 for the LNG Import infrastructure in Vasilikos Bay), aiming for a completion by early 2022. This infrastructure aims to end the energy isolation of Cyprus and has many cross-border impacts/ benefits for Cyprus and the Eastern Mediterranean region. The tender entails the design, construction and operation of the project, which consists of (a) the procurement of a floating storage and regasification unit (FSRU), of at least 125,000 cubic meters storage capacity, to unload LNG from LNG carriers ranging in size from 120,000 cubic meters to 217,000 cubic meters (Q-Flex), (b) the Construction of offshore infrastructure for the permanent berthing of the FSRU, and (c) Onshore natural gas infrastructure and related construction components for gas delivery to the Vasilikos power station and potentially other gas consumers. On 13th of December 2019, the tender was 143  awarded to the joint venture China Petroleum Pipeline Engineering, Metron, Hudong-Zhongua Shipbuilding and Wilhelmsen Ship Management.  2022). It is also expected that the Project capital costs will be financed through a (project was approved by CEF in January 2018), debt financing (e.g. EIB, etc.) and an investment -year period. Action Plan for the restoration of the electrical system after a power blackout In the case of constrained or interrupted supply of electricity, TSOC implements the Action Plan for the restoration of the electrical system after a power blackout. TSOC submits to CERA, whenever it is considered necessary, an updated action plan for the restoration of the electrical system after a power blackout. The Action Plan includes among other issues, the steps/actions to be taken by the TSOC and the Power Plants themselves, the critical support staff, alert mechanisms, means of communication and any other possible actions for the implementation of the Plan. The Action Plan is in force since 2014 and since then several revisions have been made. Additionally, in order to improve the quality of supply and taking into account CEER's recommendations to harmonise Electricity Continuity of Supply (CoS) indicators, data collection procedures and the methodology to calculate the value of CoS as well as other major aspects such as voltage and commercial quality, CERA is in the process of taking the decision on preparing such indicators with external assistance. Emergency procedures in the event of constrained or interrupted supply of oil products Due to the limited storage tanks in the Republic of Cyprus, a part of the own stocks of KODAP is stored in oil companies in Cyprus and the rest is held in Greece. Furthermore, a quantity of KODAP stocks is in the form of tickets that are held abroad on other Member States. In the event of a major supply disruption, the Minister of Energy, Commerce, and Industry may implement the emergency procedures and measures provided by the law, including the release of emergency oil stocks. KODAP, at that scenario, will implement the specified procedure and planning, following Minister's instructions. 3.3.2. ii. Regional cooperation in this area Not available. 3.3.3. iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds The LNG import Terminal project (CyprusGas2EU) was awarded a Grant from the EU CEF nder the Cynergy project (see also  Description regarding the EU funding of other PCIs, see 3.4.1.iii and 3.4.2.iii. 