11SECTION A: NATIONAL PLAN1 OVERVIEW AND PROCESS FOR ESTABLISHING THE PLAN1.1 Executive summary1.1.1 Political, economic, environmental, and social context of the planAfter submitting the draft National Energy and Climate Plan (NECP) in 2018, parliamentary elections were held in Finland in spring 2019 and the new government of Prime Minister Antti Rinne took office on 6 June 2019. After that, the new government of Prime Minister Sanna Marin has taken office on 10 December 2019 but the Government Program did not change.The Programme of Prime Minister Sanna Marin™s Government1 contains several strategic themes2 one of which is ﬁCarbon neutral Finland that protects biodiversityﬂ. In addition, objectives and measures addressing climate change are included under several other strategic themes.This strategic theme on carbon neutrality includes the following objectives:1. Finland will achieve carbon neutrality by 20352. Finland aims to be the world™s ˚rst fossil-free welfare society1 Inclusive and competent Finland Œ a socially, economically and ecologically sustainable society, http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-287-811-32 Strategic themes, https://valtioneuvosto.fi/en/rinne/government-programme123. Finland will strengthen carbon sinks and stocks in the short and long term.Related to these objectives the Government Programme states:The Government will work to ensure that Finland is carbon neutral by 2035 and carbon negative soon after that. We will do this by accelerating emissions reduction measures and strengthening carbon sinks.The Government is committed to reforming the climate policies of the European Union and Finland so that we can do our part to limit the global mean temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius. Finland aims to develop the EU™s long-term climate measures so that the EU can achieve carbon neutrality before 2050. This means tightening the emissions reduction obligation for 2030 to at least 55 % below the 1990 emissions level.We will continue our Nordic climate and energy cooperation in order to achieve carbon neutrality and will work to strengthen the position of the Nordic countries as leaders in international climate policy.In addition, the Government Programme states:Electricity and heat production in Finland must be made nearly emissions-free by the end of the 2030s while also taking into account the perspectives of security of supply.Under the Government Programme, the existing Climate Change Act (Ilmastolaki 609/20153) will be amended so as to enable achievement of carbon neutrality by 2035. The emissions reduction target for 2050 will be updated.Finland has already adopted legislation to phase out the use of coal in energy production by 2029. The Government Programme also foresees i.a. a stepwise phase-out of the use of oil for heating by the beginning of the 2030s and a halving of the use of peat in energy production by 2030.3 Unofficial translation of the Climate Change Act 609/2015 available at https://www.finlex.fi/en/laki/kaannokset/2015/en20150609.pdf13Some of the policy measures related to the energy and climate objectives in the Programme of Sanna Marin™s Government are, to an extent, already described in the Government Programme, whereas several others remain yet to be prepared and decided. Policy measures will be implemented during the current government term 2019˝2023. Work on this has already started but it has not been possible to define all of the policies and measures in line with the objectives set out in the Government Programme for the timetable of the final NECP. Therefore, this NECP is mostly based on and describes the existing, previously decided, targets and policy measures4. In accordance with the Governance Regulation, a draft update of the NECP will be submitted to the Commission in 2023. This update will be based on the new Medium-term Climate Policy Plan (Keskipitkän aikavälin ilmastopolitiikan suunnitelma), the revised Climate and Energy Strategy (Ilmasto- ja energiastrategia) and the Climate Programme for the land use sector, to be developed by 2021, to fully reflect the climate and energy objectives and targets in the Government Programme.Regarding the main basis for this NECP, the National Energy and Climate Strategy from 2016 outlines concrete actions and objectives that will enable Finland to achieve the national energy and climate targets and targets adopted by the EU for 2030, and to systematically set the course for reaching the 2050 targets. The starting point of the energy and climate strategy is to look at the energy and climate policy in different sectors comprehensively from the perspectives of emissions reduction, energy policy, growth and employment. The energy and climate policies should have a long time span and be in line with the Roadmap contained in the Report of the Parliamentary Committee on Energy and Climate Issues5. Finland™s special features, including the cold climate, long transport distances, extensive energy-intensive industry and domestic raw material resources, especially forest biomass, have been taken into account when formulating the National Energy and Climate Strategy.4 These existing policies and measures are described in the Government reports on the National Energy and Climate Strategy for 2030 (VNS 7/2016 vp) and the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan for 2030 (VNS 7/2017 vp). The measures in the transport sector have been specified in the final report of the working group on transport networks.5 Ministry of Employment and the Economy (2014) Energy and Climate Roadmap 2050. Report of the Parliamentary Committee on Energy and Climate Issues on 16 October 2014. Publications of the Ministry of Employment and the Economy. Energy and the climate 50/2014. https://tem.fi/documents/1410877/2769658/Energy+and+Climate+Roadmap+2050/9fd1b4ca-346d-4d05-914a-2e20e5d33074/Energy+and+Climate+Roadmap+2050.pdf14The National Energy and Climate Strategy outlines the actions that will enable Finland to reach the targets specified in the Government Programme and adopted in the EU for 2030, and to systematically set the course for achieving an 80˝95 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. With minor exceptions, Finland will phase out the use of coal for energy production. The Strategy contains objectives for the share of transport biofuels to be increased to 30 % and an obligation to blend light fuel oil used in machinery and heating with 10 % of bioliquids. The minimum aim is to have 250,000 electric and 50,000 gas-powered vehicles/cars on the roads. The Strategy aims for development of the electricity market at the regional and the European level to improve the flexibility to match electricity demand and supply as well as system-level energy efficiency in general. Cost-effective new production of renewable energy is planned on the basis of technology-neutral tendering in 2018˝2020.Under the National Energy and Climate Strategy, the share of renewable energy in end consumption is estimated to increase to approx. 50 % and self-sufficiency in energy to 55 %. The domestic use of imported oil will be at least halved, as planned.The other key document forming the basis for this NECP, the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan from 2017, defines the measures to ensure that Finland™s emissions reduction target for the effort sharing sector in the EU will be achieved. The greatest non-ETS sector reductions in emissions will be achieved in the transport sector.The Finnish target for emissions reduction in the effort sharing sector by 2030 is 39 % compared to 2005. The actions now included in the baseline scenario are insufficient to achieve this. The current National Energy and Climate Strategy and Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan are built on the assumption that Finland will take advantage of the 2 % one-off possibility to cancel ETS allowances towards the target in the effort sharing sector. Finland will inform about using the one-off flexibility in due course.The National Energy and Climate Strategy (2016) and the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan (2017) are based on common projections and an impact assessment was carried out on both.151.1.2 Strategy relating to the five dimensions of the Energy UnionThis integrated National Energy and Climate Plan discusses all of the five dimensions of the Energy Union on the basis of the related government reports: (i) decarbonisation, including efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the sinks and efforts to increase renewable energy, (ii) energy efficiency, (iii) energy security, (iv) the internal energy market and (v) research, innovation and competitiveness.1.1.3 Overview table with key objectives, policies and measures of the planTable 1 presents a summary of the main targets of the National Energy and Climate Plan, based on the targets set in 2016, and 2017 reports referred to in Chapter 1.1.1. Table 2 gives an overview of existing as well as planned energy and climate policy measures.1.2 Overview of the current policy situation1.2.1 National and Union energy system and policy context of the national planFinland™s national energy system has been described in Chapter 2 of Finland™s Seventh National Communication under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change6.After submitting the draft National Energy and Climate Plan in December 2018, parliamentary elections were held in Finland in spring 2019 and the new government of Prime Minister Antti Rinne took office on 6 June 2019. After that, the new government of Prime Minister Sanna Marin has taken office on 10 December 2019 but the Government Program did not change. One of the strategic themes in the Programme of Prime Minister Sanna Marin™s Government is ﬁCarbon neutral Finland that protects biodiversityﬂ. In addition, objectives and measures addressing climate change are included under several other strategic themes.6 http://unfccc.int/files/national_reports/annex_i_natcom/submitted_natcom/application/pdf/952371_finland-nc7-1-fi_nc7_final.pdf16This strategic theme on carbon neutrality includes the following objectives:1. Finland will achieve carbon neutrality by 20352. Finland aims to be the world™s ˚rst fossil-free welfare society3. Finland will strengthen carbon sinks and stocks in the short and long term.In addition, the Government Programme states i.a. that electricity and heat production in Finland must be made nearly emissions-free by the end of the 2030s while also taking into account the perspectives of security of supply.The policy measures related to energy and climate objectives of the Government Programme will be prepared, decided and implemented during the current government term 2019˝2023. Given the timeline set for submission of the final NECP, it has not been possible to define the policies and measures in line with the new objectives set in the Government Programme. Therefore, the following reflects the existing, previously decided, targets and policy measures.This NECP is based on the Government reports on the National Energy and Climate Strategy for 2030 (VNS 7/2016 vp) and the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan for 2030 (VNS 7/2017 vp) submitted to the Parliament of Finland.17Table 1. Summary of the main targets of the National Energy and Climate Plan.TargetTargeted yearYear of comparisonReduce greenhouse gas emissions in the e˜ort sharing sector by 39 %20302005Total emissions in the LULUCF sector not to exceed the calculated sinksPeriod 2021Œ2025Period 2026Œ2030accountedaccording to LULUCF regulationRenewable energy share of ˚nal energy consumption at least 51 % 2030Renewable energy share of ˚nal energy consumption 30 % in road transport2030Energy e˛ciency target: ˚nal energy consumption not more than 290 TWh (corresponds to approximately 405 TWh of primary energy consumption)20301.2.2 Current energy and climate policies and measures relating to the five dimensions of the Energy UnionThe existing energy and climate policy measures and their effects have been listed in the reporting that Finland has submitted to the European Commission in compliance with Articles 13 and 14 of the Monitoring Mechanism Regulation (EU) No 525/20137 and with Article 10 of LULUCF decision (EU) No 529/20138. In addition, the same matters have been reported in Finland™s Seventh National Communication under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change12. Table 2 gives an overview of the most important policy measures.7 http://cdr.eionet.europa.eu/fi/eu/mmr/art04-13-14_lcds_pams_projections/pams/envwmaa2q/ and REPORTING ON POLICIES AND MEASURES UNDER ARTICLE 13 AND ON PROJECTIONS UNDER ARTICLE 14 OF REGULATION (EU) No 525/2013 http://cdr.eionet.europa.eu/fi/eu/mmr/art04-13-14_lcds_pams_projections/pams/envwmaa2q/PAMs_Finland_Report_for_PAMs_and_Projections_2017.pdf8 https://mmm.fi/documents/1410837/4045459/update-18-1-2017-on-lulucf-actions_finland_final.pdf/dcad8afd-817f-4524-b75a-81393ab4f939/update-18-1-2017-on-lulucf-actions_finland_final.pdf.pdf18Table 2. Overview of the existing energy and climate policy measures. Measures marked with * are additional measures included in the With Additional Measures projections but not in the With Existing Measures projections.Energy supplyIndustryTransportResidential and servicesWasteAgricultureEnergy and carbon dioxide taxesEnergy and carbon dioxide taxesEnergy and carbon dioxide taxesEnergy and carbon dioxide taxesWaste taxEnergy and carbon dioxide taxesEnergy E˛ciency AgreementsEnergy Audit ProgrammeQuota obligation for the use of biofuels in the transport sector,enhanced measures*Consumer energy adviceRegulation on packaging, waste managementEnergy E˛ciency Agreement for Agriculture and other energy e˛ciency initiativesPromoting wind power Energy E˛ciency Agreements Promoting biogas in road transportEcodesign and energy labellingLand˚ll regulation limiting deposit of organic wasteRural Development Programme for Mainland FinlandPromoting forest chips and other wood based fuelsImplementation and improved enforcement of F-gas regulations Improving the energy-e˛ciency of vehicles,enhanced measures*Information dissemination and campaigns on energy e˛ciencyClimate Programme for Finnish AgriculturePromoting biogas in electricity and heat productionPublic procurement criteria, information measures, etc concerning F-gases *Improving the energy-e˛ciency of the transport system, enhanced measures *Building regulationActivities on organic soils *Promoting solar powerQuota obligation for the use of bioliquids in machinery *Energy certi˚cates for buildingsQuota obligation for the use of bioliquids in machinery *A premium system for renewable electricity*Quota obligation for the use of bioliquids in space heating *Promoting the production and use of biogas *Phasing out coal in energy production *19Finland has, in 2019, passed legislation (Laki hiilen energiakäytön kieltämisestä (416/2019)) to phase out the use of coal in energy production by 2029. The current Government Programme also foresees i.a. a stepwise phase-out of the use of oil for heating by the beginning of the 2030s and a halving of the use of peat in energy production by 2030.1.2.3 Key issues of cross-border relevanceDirective on the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructureDirective 2014/94/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on the deployment of alternative fuels infrastructure (the AFI Directive) entered into force in October 2014. The aim of this Directive was to minimise the oil dependence of transport and reduce the environmental effects of transport throughout the EU. Under the Directive, all Member States had to draft a national policy framework for the development of an alternative transport fuel market and deployment of the related infrastructure by November 2016. The national policy frameworks had to contain targets for alternative transport fuels and their distribution infrastructure for 2020 and 2030 as well as the measures necessary to ensure that these targets are reached.The AFI Directive also has significance across borders because measures are required to enable vehicles using alternative fuels such as electricity, natural gas or biogas to move across the Union.Nordic cooperationFinland is a member of the Nordic Council of Ministers and, under this organisation, there are specific working groups concerning electricity markets, energy efficiency, renewable energy and climate and air. There is also cooperation in the field of eco-design and energy labelling.Nordic electricity market cooperationNorway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark have long shared a single electricity market and serve as a prime example of how to harmonise and deregulate electricity markets across national borders. The design of the common Nordic electricity market aims at promoting competition on equal terms and at the socioeconomic 20efficient use of production and transmission resources, and is also key to integrating large shares of renewable energy into the system. The market price is set on the common power exchange, where supply meets demand on the day-ahead and the intraday markets.The Electricity Market Group (EMG) is a working group under the Nordic Council of Ministers and commissions analyses and provides advice on electricity market issues to the Nordic energy ministers. The group consists of experts from the ministries and energy authorities in the four Nordic countries participating in the common Nordic electricity market. The Baltic states are regularly invited to the meetings.Nordic electricity market cooperation seeks to advance a harmonised and integrated Nordic electricity market, where demand and production structures, flexibility measures and other relevant issues complement each other within the Nordic market area as a whole, in addition to promoting synchronised rules for all market participants, both companies and consumers. The focus is on:Ł Function of the regional electrical system with particular emphasis on the integration of renewable power generation, security of supply, demand ˙exibility and smart networksŁ Network investment and network planningŁ Representing Nordic interests in an EU contextŁ A more harmonised retail marketŁ Taking the initiative to involving the Baltic states in electricity market development, when appropriateŁ Establishing relevant collaboration with market stakeholdersŁ Following trends and possible research, development and innovation (RDI) needs within the Nordic electricity marketIn addition to the official cooperation among the ministries, Nordic Transmission System Operators, regulators, producers and other market stakeholders also engage in close cooperation across country borders, including the Baltic states. As the electricity system is changing with influxes of large shares of renewables, the subsequent needs for system solutions on both the supply and demand side and new European legislation, the Nordic energy ministers have decided to 21introduce an annual Nordic Electricity Market Forum9. The first such Forum was held in Stockholm in autumn 2018, and the second in Oslo in November 2019. The intention is to advance communication and collaboration between different electricity market stakeholders, in addition to establishing common visions and road maps for the future development of the Nordic electricity market, see Chapter 3.4.3.The activities of the Electricity Market Group contribute to benefiting the Nordics through initiating Nordic collaboration on initiatives that would otherwise be undertaken at a national level, but where significant positive effects are achieved through joint Nordic solutions.As such, Nordic electricity market cooperation is further transforming the market into an efficient and well-functioning one, with high levels of security of supply, an equal competitive playing field, environmental friendliness, transparency and incentives for price elasticity, in accordance with the decisions of the Nordic Council of Ministers.Nordic cooperation on energy efficiencyNordic cooperation on energy efficiency is conducted in the Networking Group on Energy Efficiency (NGEE). The group consists of experts from the ministries and energy authorities in the Nordic countries.The main objectives of cooperation in this area are to promote Nordic cooperation on energy efficiency initiatives and to implement EU/EEA directives and programmes.Cooperation is conducted in a network, where specific topics are discussed on an ad hoc basis within the group especially in relation to the ‚Clean energy for all™ package. In addition to this, the group is facilitating analysis and seminars on specific issues.9 Nordic Electricity Market Forum https://nordicelforum.org/22Nordic cooperation on renewable energyThe Nordic countries make considerable efforts to develop and increase the use of renewable energy, with the aim to diversify the energy system, to be less dependent on imports of energy sources such as fossil fuels and to reduce COˆ emissions. The Working Group for Renewable Energy (AGFE) Œ consisting of experts from the ministries and energy authorities in the five Nordic countries Œ supports the Nordic countries™ policy and development work in the renewable energy sector by exchanging information and enhancing the collaboration between Nordic countries. In addition, AGFE disseminates information about relevant projects commissioned by it in tackling different issues on renewable energy in the Nordics. Most recently, AGFE has looked at the emerging trend of distributed electricity production and self-consumption.AGFE aims to strengthen Nordic added value through projects that would usually occur nationally, but where positive effects are created through a Nordic joint effort. The group works to develop and manifest Nordic collaboration, and thereby increase Nordic competencies and competitiveness. AGFE also strives to develop Nordic perspectives on emerging policies and regulations within the EU. Some of AGFE™s recent activities are listed below:Ł In 2018, AGFE initiated a study on Distributed energy production and self-consumption in the Nordics. The aim of the study is to review the current situation and future prospect of decentralised energy production and the transition where consumers such as households are becoming also producers. The regulations and policies in the Nordic countries concerning distributed electricity production and self-consumption will be discussed, and barriers to a sound development will be identi˚ed. This study will provide useful information for policymakers and other stakeholders and will contribute to meeting upcoming requirements under the revised EU directive on renewable energy (RED II).Ł AGFE works for enhanced Nordic cooperation on implementing the current EU renewable energy directive (RED I) to 2020 as well as preparing for the revised directive (RED II) that will take e˜ect from 2020Œ2021.23Ł As a set of new forest biomass sustainability criteria were proposed in RED II, AGFE in 2017 commissioned a study on the emerging Bioenergy Sustainability Policy and its possible impacts entitled; ﬁA Nordic analysis of the proposed EU policy for bioenergy sustainabilityﬂ. This work contributed to the process of revising the Directive and increasing the knowledge of its impact on the bioenergy sector in the Nordic region.Ł In 2016, AGFE commissioned a study; ﬁNew Gameplan Œ RES Support in the Nordicsﬂ with the aim to investigate the impact of the revised State Aid Guidelines on current Nordic support schemes designed to promote renewable energy. The study contributed to the discussions regarding the design of Nordic support schemes.Nordic cooperation on eco-design and energy labellingNordic cooperation on market surveillance and policy work on eco-design and energy labelling is conducted in the Nordsyn working group. It involves cooperation among Nordic market surveillance authorities (MSAs) and policy agencies.Eco-design and energy labelling can save 10 % of energy use in the EU in 2020 which is a great contribution to the EU 2020 and 2030 goals. Effective regulations and efficient market surveillance are essential if this is to be realised and Nordsyn aims to improve the efficiency of Nordic market surveillance and policy input. Nordic authorities, producers and consumers benefit from Nordsyn, while green growth and energy efficiency are supported. The results and structure of Nordsyn can be used to improve market surveillance also in EU countries.24Some of Nordsyn™s projects and results are described below.Nordsyn sub projects:In 2018, Nordsyn focused on1. the strategic Nordic product heat pumps with two studies on how the products work in reality in Nordic climate;2. an information campaign for the new product database and up revised energy labelling;3. a Nordcrawl2 project in which the previous developed Nordcrawl web crawling tool is applied to give valuable input to market surveillance and policy work.Earlier projects: Barriers for market surveillance cooperation (2012 and 2013Œ2015), Working methods (2013Œ2015), Information material (2013), Strategic Nordic products Œ Heat pumps (2014), Challenges for market surveillance Œ difficult products (2015Œ2017), Effects of market surveillance (2013Œ2014), Cooperation with customs (2013Œ2014), How small countries work with eco-design and energy labelling (2013Œ2014), Energy labelling online information film (2016), Heat pump list prospects (2016), Strategic Nordic products - Windows (2017Œ2018), Heat pump reality studies phase 1 and 2 (2017Œ2018), Recycler interview study (2017Œ2018).Results from Nordsyn:The most appreciated result of Nordsyn is that the Nordic countries now regularly share questions, commission answers, discussions, test results and plans through email and Skype. Even though the core of Nordsyn is continuous contact and exchange of market surveillance results, Nordsyn has also been given the possibility to perform a number of projects that improve Nordic market surveillance and knowledge of legislation among producers, retailers and consumers. The Nordsyn steering group communicates in monthly Skype meetings, emails and yearly face-to-face meetings/workshops.Effects project: this study showed a prevented energy loss worth EUR 28 million for a market surveillance cost of around EUR 2 million in the Nordic countries, and an overall rate of 6.3 % non-compliance. These results show that the market surveillance is cost efficient, especially when countries cooperate.25Strategic Nordic products Heat pumps project: the project resulted in an overview of legislation, national work and recommendations. Some of these recommendations are further studied in the 2017 and 2018 heat pump projects.Challenges project: the project contains a number of product studies on how to perform market surveillance on complex products (ventilation units, transformers, professional refrigeration, etc).Nordic energy research cooperationNordic Energy Research (NER) is a platform for cooperative energy research and analysis in the Nordic region under the auspices of the Nordic Council of Ministers. It funds research of joint Nordic interest that supports these ambitions by expanding knowledge of sustainable energy and contributing to the development of new, competitive energy solutions.The NER governance structure is closely connected to both the national political systems of the five Nordic countries as well as the intergovernmental Nordic system. Its board and other committees and project steering groups consist not only of representatives from national funding agencies, but also from national energy authorities, ministries and the Nordic Council of Ministers™ secretariat. This creates constant interaction between research strategies, results and key technical issues on the political agenda.According to its strategy for the period 2018˝2021, NER™s vision is to create the knowledge basis for the Nordic countries to become global leaders in smart energy. The mission is progressed through Nordic collaboration.NER manages a number of projects and facilitates in various fields, ranging from compilation of results from ongoing studies, to technical research. To take a case in point, in 2015 NER selected three ambitious projects to serve as ﬁFlagshipsﬂ for Nordic research cooperation in energy for the coming 4-year period. These Flagships cover such diverse areas as flexible electricity market design to allow for more wind and solar energy; modelling how to achieve an energy-efficient and low carbon transport system; and enabling negative COˆ emissions through new combustion-related technologies.26With regard to the regional aspects linked to the national energy and climate plans, two projects are of particular significance:Ł Nordic Energy Technology Perspectives (NETP) is a Nordic edition of the International Energy Agency™s (IEA) global Energy Technology Perspectives. The report has been published twice (2013 and 2016) and o˜ers a detailed scenario-based regional analysis of how the Nordic countries can achieve a near carbon-neutral energy system.Ł After completing two editions of Nordic Energy Technology Perspectives (NETP), a tracking report has been made to illustrate how the Nordics progress towards a carbon neutral society. The result is Tracking Nordic Clean Energy Progress 201910; a brief, illustrative report that tracks the Nordic progress towards a carbon neutral society by highlighting the larger trends and by diving into cases where Nordic solutions could have a global impact. This study found that for the period 2013 to 2016, the Nordic countries are on track to meet the carbon neutral pathway, but it™s likely that additional measures will be necessary to continue this trend.Ł The Nordic Electric Vehicle Outlook 2018 (NEVO 2018) has been developed in cooperation between the International Energy Agency (IEA) and Nordic Energy Research. It aims to identify and discuss recent developments of electric mobility in the ˚ve Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. The report assesses the current status of the electric vehicle market, the deployment of charging infrastructure and the integration with the electricity grid at the country level. It analyses the role of European, national and local policy frameworks in supporting these developments. The analysis also provides insights on consumer behaviour and includes an outlook on the progress of electric mobility in the Nordic region up to 2030.10 https://www.nordicenergy.org/project/tncep/27Nordic climate cooperationThe Nordic climate co-operation aims to help to reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the Nordic area and elsewhere as well as seeks to find synergies between initiatives related to climate and air. Strategic focus areas in the field of climate are Nordic support to an ambitious implementation of the Paris agreement and global climate work in general, climate financing and governance, adaptation to climate change as well as demonstrations of Nordic solutions to mitigate climate change. A major area of emphasis of the work is to provide information basis to help the Nordic countries in their efforts to reach climate neutrality. This work is based on the Prime Ministers™ Declaration on Climate Neutrality from January 2019.The Nordic Working Group for Climate and Air has the mandate to implement the Programme for Nordic Co-operation on the Environment and Climate 2019Œ2024. The working group is fulfilling its mandate via project activity that consists of project activity that reflects the priorities of the co-operation programme. Projects are initiated via open calls and public invitations to tender. The working group co-operates with other working groups within the Nordic Council of Ministers as well as other international bodies, i.e. the UNFCCC, the Arctic Council.1.2.4 Administrative structure of implementing national energy and climate policiesThe Climate Change Act (609/2015) lays down the general framework for the planning of climate change policy in Finland and the monitoring of its implementation. It aims to enhance and coordinate the activities of state authorities in planning measures aimed at mitigation of climate change and adaptation to it, and at the monitoring of the implementation of these measures. Furthermore, the Act aims to strengthen the opportunities of Parliament and the public to participate in and affect the planning of climate change policy in Finland.Regarding the coordination and compilation of climate change policy plans, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment is responsible for the long-term plan for climate change policy. The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry is responsible for the national adaptation plan for climate change and the Ministry of the Environment is responsible for the medium-term plan for climate change policy as well as for compiling the annual climate change report.28The Government of Prime Minister Sanna Marin established a ministerial working group for coordinating climate and energy policy under the leadership of the Minister of the Environment and Climate Change Krista Mikkonen. The ministerial working group has representatives from each party forming the Government.The operation of the Ministerial Working Group on Climate and Energy Policy issues is based on the Government resolution concerning the organisation of official climate policy measures in the Government11. The resolution includes policy outlines for arranging the tasks and cooperation of the ministries in the preparation and implementation of domestic climate policy. A working group consisting of representatives of different ministries functions as a network for public officials and helps in the coordination and preparation of the tasks.The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment is responsible for the general coordination of the work on the Energy and Climate Strategy. The Ministry convenes a network of senior officials from the Ministry of the Environment, the Ministry of Transport and Communications, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Prime Minister™s Office for consulting on the preparation of energy policy. Each sectoral ministry is responsible for the preparation and implementation of the policy measures related to their field as follows:Ł Ministry of Economic A˜airs and Employment: use of energy by industry, services and households; industrial processes; production and consumption of energy; renewable energy; (including the share of biocomponents in transport fuels); supply of electricity and district heatingŁ Ministry of the Environment: F-gas emission projections, waste management sector, building volume, energy consumption of buildings and their sources of heating, energy consumption of machinery and their emissionsŁ Ministry of Transport and Communications: energy consumption and emissions of road, waterborne, air and rail tra˛c11 https://www.edilex.fi/valtioneuvoston_viikko/2003_05liite.html29Ł Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry: non-energy-related emissions in agriculture; use of energy in agriculture; biomass amounts; forestry; the land use, land-use change and forestry sector (LULUCF sector)Ł Ministry of Finance: energy taxes, short-term economic development.The preparation and implementation of energy and climate policy in central government is described in more detail as part of the reporting in compliance with Article 13(1) of the Monitoring Mechanism Regulation (MMR)13.Figure 1 presents a diagram of the administrative framework of drafting energy and climate policy (situation in 2019).30Figure 1.    Administrative framework of drafting energy and climate policy.Ministerial WG on Climate and Energy Policy(Chair Minister Krista Mikkonen)Secretariat of the Ministerial WG ENV ministry (chair),sectoral ministries & PM™s o˜ceSectoral ministries(Expert level coordination)Government research institutions,universities and consultantsNetwork of Senior O˜cials(Chair MEAE/Energy)(DG Riku Huttunen)Other inter-ministerial coordination channelsCoordinates the implementation of the Government Programme™s climate and energy policy targets taking into account social justice and international competitive-ness: carbon neutrality, strengthening of carbon sinks and climate and energy policy decision making.Minister of the Environment and Climate Change (chair)Minister of Transport and CommunicationsMinister of European A˚airsMinister of Economic A˚airsMinister of Agriculture and ForestryMinister of EducationMinister of Nordic Cooperation and EqualityMinistry of Economic A˚airs and EmploymentMinistry of the EnvironmentMinistry of Agriculture and ForestryMinistry of Transport and CommunicationsMinistry of FinanceMinistry of Foreign A˚airsMinistry of Education and CulturePreparation and coordination of material for the Ministerial Working Group (WG)Sectoral ministries + PM™s O˜ceInitial reconciliation and coordination of views across ministriesPreparation of Climate and Energy Strategies (incl. Scenarios): Each sectoral ministry is responsible for the preparation with regards to its respective remitSectoral studies and modelling, impact assessments funded by sectoral ministries and VN TEAS (joint analysis, assessment and research activities, coordinated by the Government)311.3 Consultations and involvement of national and Union entities and their outcome1.3.1 Involvement of the national parliamentThe Government reports forming the basis of this National Energy and Climate Strategy for 2030 (VNS 7/2016 vp) and the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan for 2030 (VNS 7/2017 vp) have been submitted to Parliament. Parliament has discussed both reports and issued related non-binding resolutions concerning them.1.3.2 Involvement of local and regional authoritiesThe Association of Finnish Local and Regional Authorities has represented local and regional authorities in the consultations. The consultations are discussed in more detail in Chapter 1.3.3.1.3.3 Consultations of stakeholders, including the social partners, and engagement of civil society and the general publicThe targets and policy measures of this National Energy and Climate Plan have already been in public consultation when preparing the National Energy and Climate Strategy and the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan. In the consultations and events organised for stakeholders, all relevant parties have been consulted, including other authorities, organisations representing different stakeholders, non-governmental organisations, labour market parties and individual citizens. The consultations and events are listed below.Energy and climate strategyThe following expert seminars on different topics were organised in connection with the preparation of the Energy and Climate Strategy:Ł 25 November 2015: Seminar launching the strategy work.Ł 27 January 2016: Expert event on the electricity market.Ł 2 February 2016: Seminar on the alternatives in the implementation of the EU™s policy outlines for 2030 and 32their e˜ects on the Finnish electricity and heating markets and on the realisation of the objectives of the Government Programme.Ł 17 February 2016: Seminar on the reform of the subsidy policy for bioenergy.Ł 23 March 2016: Seminar on the supply of forest biomass and its use in the forest industry, as raw material of advanced biofuels and as fuel in energy production.Ł 4 May 2016: Workshop on energy e˛ciency.Ł 15 June 2016: Publication of the With Existing Measures (WEM) projection.Ł 9 September 2016: Seminar on the increase in decentralised energy production and changing operating models in the energy markets.Ł 7 October 2016: Nordic viewpoints - the role of bioenergy as part of the EU™s Energy Union, a seminar.Citizen surveyThe WEM projection for the Energy and Climate Strategy was published on 15 June 2016. On the same day, a website energiajailmasto.fi, a joint platform coordinated by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment containing the survey, was opened. The website contributed to enabling citizens to participate in the preparation of the strategy.On the website, citizens could learn about the possible new policy measures listed by government officials and take a stand on them. They could also propose measures of their own. The online debate for citizens was open for two months (15 June-16 August 2016). The website was viewed almost 3,500 times and a total of 466 comments and proposals were received.Visitors to the website could also evaluate the different proposals by awarding them plusses and minuses. The three most popular proposals were:Ł Current tax-exemption from electricity tax granted to small-scale production of electricity for own use will continue. (+179)33Ł Geothermal energy will be promoted. Investments in new energy technologies may compete for aid granted to demonstration projects (+165)Ł Promotion of decentralised energy production (electricity, heat, transport, storage) through sustainable and cost-e˜ective measures. (+155).The proposals that citizens most opposed are below. Generally, significantly fewer opposing votes were given than votes in favour. On the other hand, it is worth noting that the proposals which received the highest number of minuses also received a relatively high level of support.Ł The use of coal will be banned. (-78, +64)Ł The creation of the prerequisites for the joint Nordic retail market will be continued and equal treatment of electricity vendors in the retail market will be promoted by switching to a single invoice model for all vendors of electricity. (-76, +81)Ł Finland will prepare to utilise its wind power potential extensively. (-70, +106)The background report on the Energy and Climate Strategy12 lists the policy measure proposals included in the online survey and the opinions expressed in the survey.Panel discussion on strategy priorities at SuomiAreena in PoriThe WEM projection published in June was also used as the basis of the panel discussion of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment held at SuomiAreena organised by the television channel MTV and the City of Pori on 14 July 2016.12 https://tem.fi/documents/1410877/3570111/Energia-+ja+ilmastostrategian+TAUSTARAPORTTI_1.2.+2017.pdf/d745fe78-02ad-49ab-8fb7-7251107981f7/Energia-+ja+ilmastostrategian+TAUSTARAPORTTI_1.2.+2017.pdf.pdf34In the panel discussion, Minister of Economic Affairs Olli Rehn debated on the production and consumption of energy, self-sufficiency, decarbonisation, nuclear power and renewable energy with five energy sector experts.The large audience present at the discussion had the opportunity to vote for the winner in each of the five discussions. The audience following the discussion online on MTV™s Katsomo and on SuomiAreenaTV could participate in the voting by sending a text message or through a smartphone application. It was also possible to watch a recording of the panel discussion on MTV Katsomo.Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan 2030When the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan was under preparation, several consultations and workshops were organised for stakeholders. In the workshops, measures proposed by stakeholders were explored, existing best practices were sought and the acceptability of the planned measures was examined. Two open seminars were organised for stakeholders, one at the beginning of the planning in February 2016 and the other in November 2016, when the decisions concerning the range of measures had mostly been made. In addition, smaller events were organised towards the end of the summer and at the beginning of autumn 2016 for stakeholders in transport and agriculture, and for actors in municipalities and regions. Internal workshops were also organised in administration to obtain comments from experts on the plans made in different sectors. In February 2017, an open workshop on the gender effects of the climate change plan was organised and experts in the sectors involved in the plan and experts in gender equality work were invited to participate. In addition, during summer 2016, it was possible for all citizens to comment on the measures planned by government officials on the above mentioned energiajailmasto.fi website.It was possible to comment on the entire climate plan during the circulation for comments in May 2017. A total of 84 comments were made during circulation, most of which were comments on the measures in the transport sector. The comments drew attention to other measures concerning different sectors and municipal and regional climate measures. All comments are public and available to read on the lausuntopalvelu.fi website. A public summary drawn up of the comments is also 35available on the climate plan website13. The comments were taken into account when the plan was finalised.Other energy and climate-related eventsAfter the drafting of the Energy and Climate Strategy and the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan, expert and consultation events related to the implementation of the strategy and the plan were also organised. In addition, those involved in the drafting have participated in events organised by other parties and have utilised the knowledge gained in the drafting of the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan. These events include:Ł ﬁKuinka suuret ovat metsien ja puunkäytön ilmastovaikutuksetﬂ, an event organised by the Natural Resources Institute Finland on the climate e˜ects of forests and the use of wood, 7 March 2018.Ł Consultation of stakeholders related to banning the use of coal, 26 March 2018.Ł Consultation of stakeholders related to the generation of electricity from forest chips, 28 March 2018.Ł Public debate organised by Minister of Environment, Energy and Housing Kimmo Tiilikainen. The debate also included energy issues, 23 April 2018.Ł Talanoa dialogue series 2018: Päästöjään reilusti vähentävä Suomi (‚Finland reduces its emissions signi˚cantly™),Ł Finnish society in 2050. Talanoa dialogue, 25 April 2018.Ł Coordination of Finland™s climate choices. Talanoa dialogue, 15 June 2018.Ł Tuumasta toimeen (‚Getting down to work™). Talanoa dialogue, 7 November 2018.Ł Summary of the dialogue series and a dialogue with a large number of representatives from stakeholders, 26 November 2018.13 http://www.ym.fi/download/noname/%7BC4791B40-5F32-47C8-8F09-188F3D41576F%7D/12915736Ł Conference on the electricity market in Norway, 22 November 2017.Ł Participation in the Nordic-Baltic Energy Conference 2018 organised by the Nordic Council of Ministers in Tallinn, 27˝28 September 2018.Ł How to halve citizens™ carbon footprint by 2030 - a workshop for stakeholders in the Ministry of the Environment, 28 September 2018.Statements by the public on the NECPIn the first week of December 2019, an almost-ready version of the NECP was submitted to Lausuntopalvelu.fi service where any registered user could give a public statement on the plan. This also included specifically sending a request for a statement to dozens of different associations and other public organizations. Fourteen statements were received from different advocacy groups (for wind power and bioenergy, for example) labour unions, an employers™ organization (Federation of Finnish Technology Industries) and one corporation (Outokumpu Oyj, a major steel producer).The statements were mainly positive and reflected satisfaction with how the NECP has been prepared. Some suggestions for improvements or changes were received as well. The most common are presented on the list below which also includes (as a sub-bullet) how the suggestion has been taken into account in preparing the NECP.Ł Updated ˚gures on Finland™s carbon sinks to be added to the reportŁ Will be incorporated into the ˚nal report submitted to the CommissionŁ Competitiveness of industry shall be nurturedŁ Does not directly concern the contents of the NECP but the overall political atmosphere seems to in favour of thisŁ The compensation for indirect costs related to the ETS and reductions in the electricity tax granted to industry should not be regarded as subsidies that are environmentally 37harmful as they advance electri˚cation in industry which, in turn, reduces use of fossil fuelsŁ The de˚nition is based on some international studies and what is requested in the Governance regulationŁ Renovations that improve energy e˛ciency of buildings should be subsidised signi˚cantly moreŁ The NECP is based on already-completed previous energy and climate strategies and does not o˜er measure beyond those but this shall be considered going forward when the strategies are updatedŁ Sector coupling should be taken into account developing the internal energy marketŁ There are not yet concrete political measures aimed at sector coupling and thus not in NECP either but it is a topic that will probably be on the table going forward and already discussed in the Nordic cooperation, for exampleIn addition, quite many comments were made on relatively low shares of heat pump energy and some other energy sources (especially wind power) or the numbers of gas and electrical vehicles presented in the future projections in the NECP compared to recent studies or estimated of the advocacy group in question. This can be considered a valid point but as previously mentioned, the NECP can contain only scenarios based on the current policies, measures and previous energy and climate strategies. It is however well possible that some projections (like the utilisation of heat pumps) will change to a great extent preparing new strategies.1.3.4 Consultations of other Member StatesFinland™s draft Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan was sent on 9 November 2018 for consultation to Estonia, Sweden, Denmark and Norway. With Estonia, a Skype meeting concerning the NECP was organised on 30 November 2018. Estonia sent written comments for Finland™s draft NECP. Sweden informed that they do not have any comments on the document and no response was received from Denmark and Norway.38In the Skype meeting and in their written comments, Estonia explained that the policies and measures planned in Finland may have several interactions with the developments in Estonia and raised the following two concerns:1. According to the information provided by Eesti Energia AS, many oil shale generation capacities will be shut down in Es-tonia in the coming years and this will signi˚cantly decrease the dispatchable generation sources in Estonia. The regional electricity market will remain in de˚cit while the role of inter-mittent renewable electricity generation will increase in Esto-nia. This is why there are growing concerns in Estonia about how well the country can ensure generation adequacy in the power system. Estonia also ˚nds it essential to develop the electricity market services on a regional scale. Increasing the level of ˙exibility is vital also for Estonia and the other Baltic states. In this situation, Estonia would like to emphasise the need for closer regional cooperation in order to identify common solutions for the generation adequacy and the electricity market integration issues that Estonia might face in the coming decades. For these concerns, Finland will conduct a risk assessment study in the future. Under Finland™s Energy and Climate Strategy for 2030, a target will be de˚ned for the security of supply in electricity associated with the adequacy of electric power. This will happen as soon as ENTSO-E publishes its method to de˚ne a su˛cient adequacy level. As a part of the risk assessment study, Finland will also evaluate regional electricity generation adequacy and this includes Estonia as well. In addition, the regional adequacy of electricity has been discussed in Nordic fora. Finland considers it important that 39the adequacy also of Estonia and the other Baltic states is included in the discussions.2. Decarbonisation of the transport sector plays a signi˚cant role in achieving the long-term climate and energy targets. Finland plans to increase the number of electric and gas vehicles, whereas the focus in Estonia is more on vehicles using bio-methane. Estonia considers it important to ensure a more harmonised development of the charging and refuelling infrastructure to enable the usage of electric and gas vehicles on both sides of the Gulf of Finland.Statements by the neighbouring countries on the final NECPFinland™s final NECP was send for consultation to Sweden, Denmark, Estonia, Lithuania and Nor-way. The only comment was received from Denmark, which stated that due to the lack of time Denmark is unable to give comments on the Finnish plan. Regardless of the lack of comments from the neighbouring countries, the national NECPs will give a solid base for future communication and cooperation in energy and climate policy issues between Finland and Nordic and Baltic states.1.3.5 Iterative process with the CommissionThe Commission published its assessment of Member States™ draft plans to implement the EU™s Energy Union objectives on 18 June 2019. Since then, the Commission and Finland have had a number of bilateral meetings.On 11 September 2019, a bilateral meeting on energy efficiency in the NECP took place in Brussels. This meeting was held with Ms. Claudia Canevari, acting Head of Unit for Energy Efficiency, DG ENER C3. In addition, other experts from the Commission attended the meeting. The discussions were about Finland™s national energy efficiency target for 2030 and its impact on Governance Article 6 (ex Article 6 EE), which a Member State may take into account when setting its national target. Finland also informed the Commission about the possible new actions that will be presented in the National Energy Efficiency Task Force (the report was published on 6 October 2019) and their impact on strengthening Finland™s national target and increasing Finland™s contribution to the EU common goal.40On 7 October 2019, a bilateral meeting on the EPBD and issues related to the future implementation of the amendment of the EPBD took place in Helsinki. Policy Officer Mr. Dimitrios Athanasioun from the Commission was present. The discussions were about the implementation of the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive and issues related to its future implementation.Mr. Ville Niemi from the Commission, DG Energy visited Finland on 6 September to attend the meeting of several ministries responsible for drafting the NECP. Around 15 officials were present in the meeting. In this meeting, we described the current state of preparation of the Finnish NECP and discussed the recommendations that Finland had received from the Commission in June and the best ways forward in finalising Finland™s NECP.In addition to these bilateral meetings, Finland attended the following meetings to contribute to NECP preparation:Ł Meetings of the Commission™s Technical Working Group on NECPs on 3 July and 17 September 2019 in Brussels.Ł Workshop on renewables and energy e˛ciency on 11 September 2019 in Brussels.Ł A joint meeting with members of the Technical Working Group on NECPs, the SET Plan Steering Group, and the Innovation Fund Expert Group on 16th September in Brussel.Ł A Nordic-Baltic Energy Conference 2019: Good governance, policy design and solutions towards 2030. This Conference was organised in Estonia in 23Œ24 October 2019 and a whole session of the conference was dedicated to questions on updating the NECPs of the Nordic countries and Baltic states, and the need for regional coordination. Finland attended this Conference and presented its NECP preparation process. The European Commission was also present at the Conference.411.4 Regional cooperation in preparing the plan1.4.1 Elements subject to joint or coordinated planning with other Member StatesIn 2015, the Nordic Council of Ministers for Business, Energy & Regional Policy (the Nordic Council of Ministers for Sustainable Growth as from the beginning of 2018) decided to carry out a strategic study on Nordic energy cooperation and the possibilities to develop it over the following 5 to 10 years. The study was headed by Jorma Ollila and the final report was published in 2017. In accordance with the report™s proposal concerning the operational implementation of Nordic energy cooperation, a meeting of public officials coordinating the preparation of the national plans was organised at the initiative of Sweden on 8 May 2018 in order to exchange information and to share best practices. Since then, this ad-hoc group has discussed and shared best practises related to the preparation of the NECPs. A seminar on the modelling of estimated developments related to Energy and Climate Strategies was organised in Oslo on 10 and 11 October 2018.A meeting of Nordic senior officials was organised in Stockholm on 10 October 2018 and the national plans were also discussed in the meeting. The NECPs were on the agenda of the high-level meeting of the Nordic Council of Ministers and of the Nordic Energy Seminar - The energy system of the future, both on 1 October 2019.1.4.2 Explanation of how regional cooperation is considered in the planRegional cooperation is important in the Nordic and Baltic context. The well-functioning Nordic-Baltic electricity market is expected to continue and even expand in the future. The future common gas market between Finland and the Baltic states will increase regional cooperation in that field.The regional aspect has been taken into consideration in the modelling of the electricity market and other energy related assessments.Chapter 1.2.3 provides more information on the regional cooperation.