3.2 Dimension energy efficiencyPlanned policies, measures and programmes to achieve the indicative national energy efficiency contributions for 2030 as well as other objectives referred to in point 2.2, including planned measures 103and instruments (also of financial nature) to promote the energy performance of buildings, in particular as regards the following:i. Energy efficiency obligation schemes and alternative policy measures under Articles 7a and 7b of Directive 2012/27/EU and to be prepared in accordance with Annex IIii. Long-term renovation strategy to support the renovation of the national stock of residential and non-residential buildings, both public and private, including policies, measures and actions to stimulate cost-effective deep renovation and policies and actions to target the worst performing segments of the national building stock, in accordance with Article 2a of Directive 2010/31/EUiii. Description of policy and measures to promote energy services in the public sector and measures to remove regulatory and non-regulatory barriers that impede the uptake of energy performance contracting and other energy efficiency service modelsiv. Other planned policies, measures and programmes to achieve the indicative national energy efficiency contributions for 2030 as well as other objectives referred to in point 2.2 (for example measures to promote the exemplary role of public buildings and energy-efficient public procurement, measures to promote energy audits and energy management systems, consumer information and training measures, and other measures to promote energy efficiency)v. Where applicable, a description of policies and measures to promote the role of local energy communities in contributing to the implementation of policies and measures in points i, ii, iii and ivvi. Description of measures to utilise energy efficiency potentials of gas and electricity infrastructurevii. Regional cooperation in this area, where applicable104viii. Financing measures, including Union support and the use of Union funds, in the area at national levelThe policies and measures for the period 2021Œ2030 required in the updated Energy Efficiency Directive have been outlined by the extensive energy efficiency working group appointed by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment. The working group started its work in November 2018.For the implementation of Article 7 of the Energy Efficiency Directive over the period of 2014Œ2020, Finland has chosen the alternative policy measures described in Section 3.3.2 of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) IV23. Finland will continue with alternative policy measures also over the period of 2021Œ2030. Planned measures for the implementation of Article 7 are defined in Chapter 2.2.Voluntary Energy Efficiency AgreementsEnergy savings and energy efficiency have been improved through Voluntary Energy Efficiency Agreements drawn up between the Government and industrial/municipal associations already since the 1990s. The current period of the agreement for 2017Œ2025 plays an important role in the achievement of Finland™s cumulative energy saving targets set for the periods 2014Œ2020 and 2021Œ2030 in Article 7 of the Energy Efficiency Directive. Finland will continue the Voluntary Energy Efficiency Agreement also after the current period (2017Œ2025).The agreements are intended to guide companies and municipalities towards continuous improvement in energy efficiency. The participants set a quantitative target to improve their energy efficiency and they implement actions in order to reach their targets.The Government grants energy subsidies to support the implementation of new energy-efficient technologies and, case-dependently, the conventional energy efficiency investments and energy audits of the participant municipalities and small companies.The agreement scheme also supports the implementation of the obligations set out in other articles of the directive and also supports the implementation of the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (EPBD). Voluntary Energy Efficiency 105Agreements cover Industries (Industry, Energy sector and Private Service sector), Property Sector, Municipal Sector, and Oil Sector (Distribution of liquid heating fuels).The municipalities and companies signing up for the agreement undertake toŁ Promote energy e˛ciency in a goal-oriented and systematic manner, for example, through the deployment of an energy management system,Ł Explore the possibilities to save energy by carrying out energy audits,Ł Explore the ˚nancing solutions (e.g. PPP, EPC and ESCO) and use them as necessary when ˚nancing is an obstacle to investing in energy e˛ciency,Ł Train their personnel and inform the personnel about promoting energy e˛ciency, andŁ Monitor their energy consumption and report their consumption and energy savings on an annual basis.Transport fuel taxationEnergy savings are created as a result of Finland™s higher transport fuel taxation (including excise duty, carbon dioxide-based taxes, strategic stockpile fee and value added tax) compared with the EU™s minimum requirements for the level of fuels taxes and value added tax.Road transportThe measures in transport have been listed in Chapter 3.1.1 under the headings 2) ﬁImproving the energy efficiency of vehicles and other means of transportﬂ and 3) ﬁImproving the energy efficiency of the transport systemﬂ.Energy auditsAlong with the Energy Efficiency Act (energiatehokkuuslaki 1429/2014), which entered into force at the beginning of 2015, energy audits have been divided into a voluntary side involving support and into compulsory four-yearly energy audits 106carried out in large companies. Energy aid for energy audit activities is granted to voluntary audits. These include four audit models for service properties, three audit models for industry, two audit models for the energy sector, a municipal renewable energy audit, energy planning for farms, and an energy audit model for transport chains that, with minor adjustments, can be used also as an energy audit model for transport companies (NEEAP IV23, KETO-3-TEM).Energy performance of buildingsFinland will adopt an energy subsidy scheme designed especially for housing companies with the goal of supporting improvements in energy efficiency and measures aiming toward smart, flexible energy consumption. The principle of the subsidy scheme is that the assistance will be paid in proportion to the energy efficiency benefits achieved. The projects must be cost-effective and appropriately designed.Finland will phase out the use of fossil fuel oil in heating by the start of the 2030s. Oil heating will no longer be used in properties owned by central and local governments after 2024. Finland will adopt a separate action plan to encourage properties using oil heating to switch to other forms of heating during the 2020s.The Land Use and Building Act (132/1999) was amended in 2017 in order to transpose the nearly zero-energy (NZEB) provisions of the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive. The amendment came into force on 1 January 2017.Minimum requirements for all new buildings are issued in the National Building Code of Finland. The requirements are set out in the Decree of the Ministry of the Environment on the Energy Performance of New Buildings (1010/2017). The requirements came into force on 1 January 2018. The same requirements apply both to private and public buildings. These regulations set the level for NZEB in Finland. The same requirements apply to the renovation of an existing building to a nearly zero-energy building.Under the Decree, the overall energy consumption (E-value) of a building must not exceed the given limits. The E-value includes energy consumption of the heating, ventilation, domestic hot water, cooling, as well as system auxiliary units, consumer equipment and lighting. The Decree also sets out requirements for heat losses, 107summertime temperatures, specific fan power of ventilation and AC as well as for energy consumption metering.The minimum requirements for existing buildings are set out in the Decree of the Ministry of the Environment on Improving the Energy Efficiency of Buildings in Conjunction with Repair and Modification Work (4/2013). The requirements came into force on 1 June 2013. The Decree has been supplemented with the Decree of the Ministry of the Environment on Amending the Decree of the Ministry of the Environment on Improving the Energy Performance of Buildings Undergoing Renovation or Alteration (2/2017). The requirements must always be fulfilled in the case of repairs and modifications where the improvement of energy efficiency is technically, functionally and financially feasible.Under Decree 4/2013 of the Ministry of the Environment, compliance with the requirements set for the energy efficiency of renovation projects can be done in three alternative ways. A party engaging in a building project subject to a permit must select one of following alternatives: 1) energy efficiency requirements for each building element, 2) E-value requirements of a building or 3) Energy consumption requirements for a building. In addition to the three previous alternatives, the Decree sets out requirements for the technical systems.According to the Cost-optimal reports of Finland submitted to the Commission in 2018, the minimum requirements for new buildings and for existing buildings are on a cost-optimal level. The next review will take place in 2022Œ2023. As regards buildings, the most important current energy efficiency measures are promoting the installation/use of heat pumps in terraced and single-family houses (RA-04-TEM), the energy efficiency agreement on the distribution of heating fuel oil, and the energy efficiency regulations on new buildings, which set out the minimum level of building requirements. See NEEAP IV23, Section 3.6.1 and RA-no-YM measures.Promotion of energy efficiency at system levelEnergy efficiency has been taken into consideration in the planning of networks and in tariffs and regulations (Electricity Market Act 588/2013).108Maintaining the prerequisites for combined power and heat generationEfficient cogeneration works in an open energy market and competes with other generation methods. The energy efficiency measures in efficient cogeneration are related to improving the overall efficiency of primary energy use and the overall efficiency of energy production within the scope of energy efficiency agreement activities.District heating and coolingEnergy efficiency measures in the field of district heating and cooling are related to improving the efficiency of primary energy use, more efficient utilisation of waste heat and the overall efficiency of energy production within the scope of Voluntary Energy Efficiency Agreement activities.Communication and training to promote energy efficiencyThe communication, advisory and training activities related to energy efficiency cover all sectors from consumers to industry. The nationally coordinated Energy advice for consumers and the guidance implemented by energy companies cover all aspects of consumer communications and guidance related to the promotion of energy efficiency and use of renewable energy. Guidance for transport, renovation and partly also for farms is included in the nationally coordinated Energy advice for consumers service.Energy efficiency in awarding public contractsIn compliance with the Directive, the Energy Efficiency Act (energiatehokkuuslaki 1429/2014) lays down provisions on the energy efficiency requirements concerning central government authorities with regard to public procurements. Guidelines on the energy efficiency of public procurements, updated by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment in January 2016, have been drawn up for central government authorities and other public administration.In addition, Motiva Ltd continues to organise annual training events focusing on the energy efficiency requirements of public procurements. The energy efficiency of procurements is also promoted by the Competence Centre for Sustainable and Innovative Public Procurement, established in 2017. The aim of the Competence 109Centre is to increase procurements that promote the sustainable development goals from both the social and the environmental perspective.Energy Aid SchemeEnergy aid (explained in more detail in Chapter 3.1.2.) may be granted also to investments for companies that have signed energy efficiency agreements. For new energy technology projects, aid may be granted also for companies outside the energy efficiency agreements. In addition, energy aid is granted for voluntary energy audits. The total budget for energy efficiency investments has traditionally been EUR 10Œ20 million of the total Energy Aid Scheme budget.In addition, energy aid will be used to promote non-ETS investments related to decentralised energy production and renewable fuels in transport.Regional cooperationRegional cooperation is carried out with Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Iceland in the networking group on energy efficiency The group has also worked in cooperation with the Baltic states.FundingA comprehensive report on financial solutions related to energy efficiency was compiled in 2017 and 2018. The report sought to identify financial instruments that could be used to improve energy efficiency in Finland. Obtaining financing for good projects is generally not a problem in Finland although the prerequisites for granting financing are today examined more closely. It is essential to provide information on energy efficiency and its benefits so that the macroeconomic aspects can be considered when investments are made. Information must also be available at the right time. The work will be continued in 2019 and beyond with the aim of bringing together actors both from the financial sector and from organisations that implement energy efficiency measures to identify concrete procedures to promote the implementation of energy efficiency measures.110Energy efficiency first principleImproved energy efficiency throughout the whole energy system, from production and transmission to distribution and end-use, makes a major contribution to the national goals of a competitive low-carbon economy and the security of energy supply.The future energy system will be flexible and intelligent. In addition to directing energy production, energy consumption may also be managed and coordinated as indicated by the current production situation. Hybrid systems that combine different forms of production will become more widespread. Flexibility of demand will change the role of the consumer. An active consumer will simultaneously consume, produce, save and store energy. Digitalisation and the Industrial Internet will help to improve the efficiency of energy use everywhere. Energy efficiency is a cost-effective way of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and the mentality of the circular economy will further increase the efficient use of resources.Finland aims to benefit from the ﬁsmart and efficient integrated energy systemﬂ approach to implement the idea of ﬁenergy efficiency firstﬂ principle: Combined generation of heat and power, and related district heating and cooling with smart demand response mechanisms improve energy efficiency, help to increase the share of renewables and link heating with electricity to provide flexibility.Finland has for decades used the potential for aligning energy efficiency and renewable energy policies, linking heating with electricity for flexibility and integrating more renewables in both heating and electricity, and utilising waste heat and waste cold. Bearing in mind the benefits from greater sector coupling through electrification as the energy system decarbonises, the heating/cooling sector is critical and the use of more renewable sources will be encouraged. Taking overall cost-efficiency into account at the whole energy system level from supply to end use of energy will help to facilitate the ﬁenergy efficiency firstﬂ -principle also in practice.Energy communitiesSee Section 3.1.2.i.111Circular economyIn 2016, the Finnish Innovation Fund Sitra published for a first time the Finnish roadmap to a cir-cular economy38 and updated it in 2019. The aim of the Finnish Government and the roadmap is to make Finland a global leader in the circular economy by 2025. The roadmap describes the concrete actions that can accelerate the transition to a competitive circular economy in Finland. The roadmap highlights best practices and pilots that can be easily replicated. It was constructed in close cooperation with government ministries, as well as almost 50 other representatives from the public, private and third sectors.Finland has recognised that shifting towards the circular economy has many synergies with greenhouse gas emission reduction measures and the potential to make a significant contribution to reaching Finland™s energy and climate goals. There is an ongoing research project by the Finnish Environment Institute to better understand the potential quantifiable greenhouse gas emission effects of the circular economy and the most cost-efficient policy measures moving towards the circular economy.Motiva Ltd, a state owned company which promotes the efficient and sustainable use of energy and materials, has developed external material efficiency audits to provide support to businesses to help them identify and make resource efficiency improvements. Material efficiency is a subsidised programme in which authorised auditors perform the auditing using the audit model. The Government is offering economic incentives for these audits. Motiva Ltd has also developed a Finnish Industrial Symbiosis System (FISS), which is a systematic way to help companies and other organisations to create partnerships and new business opportunities through more efficient use of raw materials, technology, services and energy. Around 650 companies from different sectors and around 5,000 resources are currently involved across Finland.The Government Programme aims to strengthen the role of Finland as a forerunner of the circular economy. The Programme outlines several key measures to promote the transition towards the circular economy. These measures include 38 Leading the cycle - Finnish roadmap to a circular economy 2016Œ2025 https://media.sitra.fi/2017/02/28142644/Selvityksia121.pdf112the implementation of the strategic circular economy programme and associated indicators. To prepare and implement the programme, EUR 7.2 million have been allocated for 2020Œ2023. Also, additional funding of EUR 48 million has been granted for 2020Œ2021 to support innovation and ecosystems in the circular economy.As a key measure, Finland will also implement the Plastics Roadmap to improve the efficiency of plastics recovery, recycling and product design, creating conditions for investments and innovations in the circular economy and reducing the dependency on fossil raw ingredients by increasing bio-based and biodegradable solutions