4.6 Dimension research, innovation and competitivenessi. Current situation of the low-carbon-technologies sector and, to the extent possible, its position on the global market (that analysis is to be carried out at Union or global level)ii. Current level of public and, where available, private research and innovation spending on low-carbon-technologies, current number of patents, and current number of researchers158iii. Breakdown of current price elements that make up the main three price components (energy, network, taxes/levies)iv. Description of energy subsidies, including for fossil fuelsThe competitiveness of low-carbon technologies compared with the alternatives has improved considerably over the past few years. The competitiveness of renewable forms of energy with particularly great variation (solar and wind power) has improved. According to monitoring of energy technology exports carried out in Denmark, energy technology exports accounted for just under 10 % of Finland™s goods exports in 2016, which is among the highest percentages in Europe. Finland™s traditional strengths include bioenergy solutions. Finland is also a significant importer of energy technology. Finland imports solar energy systems (both solar power and heat), among others.According to the estimate made by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment of Finland, Finnish energy technology exports in 2018 grew to EUR 5.1 billion euros. The estimate excludes energy technology related services. The share of energy technology accounted for 7.9 % of total exports for the year. Finland™s trade balance in energy technology was clearly positive in 2016Œ2018. In 2018, the energy technology trade balance was around EUR 1 billion, meaning that Finland exported more energy technologies than it imported. The Finnish energy technology cluster is globally competitive. The analysis included energy technologies related to energy production, distribution, storage as well as certain materials and components.Public research and development funding targeted at the energy sector has declined over the past few years. In 2015, EUR 177.5 million of public R&D funding was allocated to the energy sector, EUR 69.7 million in 2016, EUR 61.7 million in 2017 and the estimate for 2018 is EUR 42.4 million. In 2015, the financing provided to innovations in the energy sector by Finland was highest in the IEA countries in relation to GDP.The consumer price of electricity for households in Finland is below the EU average, which improves Finland™s competitiveness. In 2017, Finnish households paid an average of 16 eurocents per kWh for electricity (EU average 20 eurocents per kWh) The price of electricity for other than households in Finland was about 7 eurocents 159per kWh (EU average euro11 cents per kWh). Finland taxes fossil fuels fairly heavily and the difference is considerable, particularly when compared to non-EU countries. The competitiveness of an individual industry in terms of energy price also partly depends on the electricity tax reliefs and refunds granted.