2.5 Dimension research, innovation and competitivenessi. National objectives and funding targets for public and, where available, private research and innovation relating to the Energy Union including, where appropriate, a timeframe for when the objectives are to be metii. Where available, national 2050 objectives related to the promotion of clean energy technologies and, where appropriate, national objectives including long-term targets (2050) for the deployment of low-carbon technologies, including for decarbonising energy- and carbon-intensive industrial sectors and, where applicable, for related carbon transport and storage infrastructureiii. Where applicable, National objectives with regard to competitivenessFinland makes major investments in developing new technologies and commercialising innovations. In recent years, Finland has invested in research and innovations much above EU and OECD averages measured in % of GDP. The Finnish Research and Innovation Council has set a target for Finland to be the most attractive and most competent environment for innovations and experiments by 2030. Finland has invested heavily in particular to speed up the introduction of clean and smart energy systems and associated products and services, and also more extensively to speed up resource-wise solutions that are based on user 81needs and required by communities. For example, the innovation funding agency Business Finland invested approximately EUR 150 million in energy-related projects.In October 2016, Finland joined the Mission Innovation project launched in connection with the Paris climate summit, in which 20 countries with a leading role in energy use and energy technologies undertook to double their R&D investments in clean energy over five years. The Mission Innovation cooperation will be used to promote the networking of Finnish cleantech companies and research institutes in the field and to create partnerships. For this purpose, the aim is to strengthen a clean energy ecosystem as part of the growth programme (a cooperation network for actors) based on strong public-private partnership. The current National Energy and Climate Strategy states that Finland will continue to make major investments in developing new technologies and commercialising innovations. Full use will be made of international Mission Innovation cooperation. Since the strategy was launched in 2016, several actions have been taken to fulfil the goals of the strategy.The energy sector is undergoing a massive transformation which involves a huge number of new business opportunities for companies. Constant renewal is expected in the energy sector, which is reflected especially in many system level developments. The transforming energy system will create new business opportunities while changing existing ones. New, more comprehensive service concepts will be created. R&D&I funding is being allocated to the efforts to deal with this transformation and to the development of related new business models. For experimentation and development purposes, cooperation networks (ecosystems) are to be established where the parties produce added value in the form of products, services and information in close interaction, both for each other and for customers outside the ecosystem. Exact programs and R&D&I funding cannot be given for 2030 and beyond . Government planning consists of one year of budget planning and 4 years of action and economy planning.