823 POLICIES AND MEASURES3.1 Dimension decarbonisation3.1.1 GHG emissions and removalsi. Policies and measures to achieve the target set under Regulation (EU) 2018/842 as referred in point 2.1.1 and policies and measures to comply with Regulation (EU) 2018/841, covering all key emitting sectors and sectors for the enhancement of removals, with an outlook to the long-term vision and goal to become a low emission economy and achieving a balance between emissions and removals in accordance with the Paris Agreementii. Where relevant, regional cooperation in this areaiii. Without prejudice to the applicability of state aid rules, financing measures, including Union support and the use of Union funds, in this area at national level, where applicableThe 2017 Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan defines policy measures enabling Finland to achieve the emissions reduction obligation in the Effort Sharing Regulation (39 % reduction in emissions compared to 2005). The 2030 target level for Finland is going to be around 20.6 Mt CO2 equivalent. According to the WEM projection, existing policies and measures will lead to an emissions level of approximately 26.4 CO2 equivalent in 2030, leaving a gap of about 6 Mt CO2 83equivalent between the WEM projection and the target in 203036. If full advantage is taken of one-off flexibility, the gap will be about 5 Mt CO2 equivalent. With the measures of the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan, this gap can be covered (see Figure 9). A more detailed description of the measures defined in the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan is provided below.2022242628302021202220232024202520262027202820292030Emissions (Mt CO˜-eq.)Emission allocation for 2021Œ2030Baseline scenarioKAISU With KAISU's measures, the target for the whole period will be exceeded by ~ 6.8 Mt CO˜-eq.In the baseline scenario, the total need for additional reductions in emission for the whole period is:~ 23.9 Mt C0˜-eq.Figure 9.    The emission allocation for the period 2021Œ2030, an estimate of emissions according to the WEM projection (baseline scenario) and with the measures of the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan (KAISU). One-off flexibility is not included in the figure.Transport and spatial planning in urban areasIn the effort sharing sector, the greatest potential for reducing emissions is in the area of transport. The goal is to reduce transport emissions by at least half by 2030 compared to 2005 levels. Measures will be focused on road transport, which presents the greatest potential for emission savings. Additional measures in the transport sector are estimated to result in a reduction of approximately 3.1 Mt CO2 equivalent by 2030. The emission reduction measures can be grouped into three sets:36 The climate and energy objectives of the Programme of Prime Minister Sanna Marin™s Government in office since December 2019 are not yet implemented into national plans, or policies and measures.841. Replacing fossil fuels with renewable and low-emission fuels and power sources.The emissions reduction in this set is estimated at about 1.6 Mt CO2 equivalent.The main measure is a quota obligation of biofuels, see Chapter 3.1.2. Other measures included in this set are the promotion of the transport infrastructure and the infrastructure for biogas use in transport. An appropriation of EUR 3 million per year is reserved in the Government budget for 2018Œ2021 to promote the infrastructure for electric vehicles and use of biogas in transportation, and in addition an appropriation of EUR 1.5 million is reserved to promote the infrastructure for electric vehicles in residence houses.According the existing Governmental Programme, the promotion of alternative fuels in transport will be promoted by continuing and raising the subsidy for building charging infrastructure and including sustainably produced biogas in the scope of distribution obligation. An obligation will be set for petrol station chains to provide a certain number of charging points for electric cars. In addition, the purchase subsidy for electric cars will be assessed and a national obligation will be set in accordance with the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive to build a charging infrastructure for electric cars whenever a large-scale renovation is completed in a housing company or on business premises.In addition, the aim is to intensify cooperation between the Nordic countries to reduce transport emissions, for example, by developing a shared set of target indicators relating to di˜erent emissions reduction measures in transport in the Nordic countries.2. Improving the energy e˛ciency of vehicles and other means of transport.85The emission reduction in this set is estimated at about 1.1 Mt CO2 equivalent.The main measure in this category is the binding CO2 threshold values applicable to automotive manufacturers at the EU level. The main measures at the national level are support for buying fully electric cars (EUR 2,000) and support for gas or ethanol conversions of old cars (EUR 1,000 for gas and EUR 200 for ethanol conversions). An appropriation of EUR 6 million per year is reserved in the Government budget for 2018Œ2021 for this purpose.In 2018, there was an eight-month scrapping premium campaign, too. In this campaign the buyer of a new car who scraps an old car was o˜ered support from central government to the amount of EUR 1,000Œ2,000, depending on the power source of the new car.The introduction of a low-emission ˙eet in the public sector will be accelerated in line with EU requirements. Finally, a voluntary Green deal is being developed for car dealers directing them to present low-emission vehicle alternatives to customers.3. Improving the energy e˛ciency of the transport system.The estimated reduction in emissions in this set is approximately 0.4 Mt CO2 equivalent, including the impact that the development of land use will have on emissions.Measures included in this set are participation in the coordination of transport and land use in urban regions, and in work concerning transport systems through, for example, agreements on land use, housing and transport (MAL). The aim is to ensure that projects promoting walking, cycling and public transport are prioritised in urban transport planning and project funding. In 2018Œ2021, an appropriation of 86EUR 5.5 million per year has been reserved in the central government budget for the promotion of digitalisation and public transport services in large urban regions and for increasing contractual rail transport services as part of the change in people™s mobility habits. In addition to these, jobs and services in growing urban regions are steered towards regional centres, sub-centres and public transport nodes with a high service level, and in˚ll construction and the creation of locations that are bene˚cial for the community structure and the use of such locations for new construction will be promoted in urban regions.According the existing Governmental Programme, a programme for the promotion of walking and cycling will be implemented. In 2020Œ2022, EUR 41 million will be reserved for the planning work and project promotion related to walking and cycling. In connection with the network development projects, an amount of EUR 10 million of the total funding will be allocated to meet the infrastructure needs of walking and cycling. A climate-based overall increase of EUR 20 million a year will be provided for public transport subsidies and purchases. Legislation will be introduced enabling the introduction of tra˛c congestion charging in city regions, with the aim of managing tra˛c.The amount of rail investment will be increased from the current level. Besides direct ˚nancing from the budget, separate funding will be provided for di˜erent projects (for example, the main railway line and its extensions, the railway line west from Helsinki (including the Espoo urban railway), the railway line east from Helsinki). However, progress in large-scale rail projects calls for agreement between the central government, municipalities and other possible bene˚ciaries regarding project implementation and ˚nancing.87Finally, a reform of taxes and payments in sustainable transport will be initiated to reduce emissions. Taxation of fossil fuels will be increased by EUR 250 million over the electoral term in line with the forecast rise in consumer prices. Changes in income taxation and bene˚ts will be made in order to take into consideration the impact on low-income individuals.Beside these measures, the Government Programme lines, that a roadmap for fossil-free transport will be drafted in this Governmental period. The roadmap will present the measures to halve GHG emissions from national transport by 2030 and to net-zero transport emissions by 2045. The roadmap identifies both the most important measures to remove GHG in the mid- and long term as well as the costs and assessments of impacts. As part of the work, the introduction of traffic congestion charging and the development of an emissions trading system for transport will be assessed. The roadmap will be finished at autumn 2020.Building-specific heatingGreenhouse gas emissions from building-specific heating are included in the effort sharing sector. The majority of emissions are caused by oil heating. Emissions from oil heating can be reduced by improving the energy performance of oil-heated buildings, increasing the use of biofuel oil or changing the heating method. As a measure to reduce the emissions from building-specific heating, an act for an obligation to supply light fuel oil used in heating with 10 % of bioliquid was passed and entered into force on 1 April 2019. As an example to other actors, central government will phase out oil heating in its premises by 2024 and encourages all public actors to do the same. In addition, the energy efficiency of the existing building stock will be improved and the use of renewable energy will be promoted. Alongside these measures, clean combustion of pellets and chopped wood will be promoted to reduce soot and particle emissions. By 2030, the combined impact of these measures will be approximately 0.2 Mt CO2 equivalent.MachineryEmissions from machinery can be reduced by increasing the energy efficiency of machinery or by switching to alternative fuels or power sources. An act to promote 88the use biofuel in heating, machinery and stationary engines entered into force on 1 April 2019 (laki biopolttoöljyn käytän edistämisestä 418/2019). The act sets an obligation to supply light fuel oil with bio-liquid so that the share of biofuel will increase from 3 % in 2021 towards 10 % in 2028. In addition, the use of biogas in machinery will be promoted, contributions will be made at the EU level to the development of CO2 regulation applied to machinery, energy-efficient and low-emission machinery will be promoted through public procurements, and guidance through information will be used to promote energy-efficient use of machinery.Alongside these measures, the knowledge base related to the reduction in CO2 emissions from machinery will be strengthened and the taxation of heating fuels has been increased; light fuel oil for heating is also used in machinery. In October 2019, a voluntary Green deal on machinery was agreed upon between the Ministry of the Environment and the Association of Finnish Technical Traders. The deal promotes a reduction in emissions from machinery. The emission reduction achieved using these measures by 2030 is estimated at approximately 0.5 Mt CO2 equivalent.Industrial oil useThe measures for reducing emissions from industrial oil use are the obligation to supply light fuel oil with 10 % bio liquid, promoting the replacement of fuel oil-fired boilers by boilers fired with solid fuel, enhancing energy audit activities and increasing the taxation of heating fuels.Energy taxesEnergy taxation is aimed at mitigating climate change. In the past few years, the emphasis on the taxation of liquid fuels has shifted towards carbon dioxide tax. The heat values and carbon dioxide emissions of bio-based fuels are lower than those of fossil fuels and a tax consisting of an energy content tax and a carbon dioxide tax helps to ensure that taxation on biofuels is lower than that on fossil fuels.The excise duty on fuels, or the fuel tax, consists of an energy content tax and a carbon dioxide tax. The energy content tax is based on the heat value of the fuel and the carbon dioxide tax on its specific carbon dioxide emission when burnt. A 89strategic stockpile fee is collected on both fossil and bio-based transport fuels in connection with the excise duty.Energy taxation is described in more detail in the IEA™s In-depth-review of Finland™s energy policy37.Waste managementEmissions from waste management originate from landfilling, composting, digestion and the treatment of wastewater. In addition, waste incineration causes carbon dioxide emissions which have increased due to extended incineration capacity. Alternative policy measures to reduce emissions from waste incineration will be assessed. Furthermore, the implementation of the Government Decree on Landfills will be monitored and followed up.F-gasesFluorinated greenhouse gases, or F-gases, are emitted by various appliances that use these industrial gases that are highly harmful to the climate. Existing measures will reduce F-gas emissions efficiently but with a delay. As additional measures to speed up emissions reductions, appliances containing F-gases will be avoided in public-sector procurements, the introduction of alternative technologies will be promoted and the recovery of F-gases will be enhanced by means of training and disseminating information. In addition, alternative technologies suited to local conditions will be explored and demonstrated. By 2030, the combined impact of these measures will be approximately 0.3 Mt CO2 equivalent.AgricultureThe current measures in the agricultural sector are mainly related to the implementation of the EU™s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). The Rural Development Programme for Mainland Finland 2014Œ2020 contains several measures related to the mitigation of and adaptation to climate change: incorporation of slurry into the soil, recycling of nutrients and organic matter, 37 https://webstore.iea.org/energy-policies-of-iea-countries-finland-2018-review90environment management of grasslands, catch crops, plant cover in arable land in winter and the use of organic cover for horticulture plants and seed potatoes. An investment subsidy is available for controlled subsurface drainage, for more efficient storage, treatment and use of manure and for investments in energy efficiency and sustainable energy, such as biogas plants. As part of the advisory services in the programme, it is possible to receive advice on energy efficiency and issues related to the mitigation of and adaptation to climate change. National funding was provided between 2016 and 2018 for the three-year project ﬁMaking use of agricultural nutrientsﬂ, which disseminates information on the funding possibilities related to the recycling of nutrients, promotes new experiments, disseminates research information and identifies and removes bottlenecks in the recycling of nutrients.The additional measures in the agricultural sector mentioned in the Medium-term Climate Change Plan mainly apply to the mitigation of emissions from organic soils. These measures include growing crops in organic soils for several years with zero tillage, raising the water table through controlled subsurface drainage, the afforestation of organic soils and the promotion of biogas production. Also, the sequestration and storage of carbon in the soil and the implementation of the ﬁ4 per 1000ﬂ initiative will be promoted through research projects and experiments. By 2030, the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in the agricultural sector through the above measures will be of the order of 0.5 Mt CO2 equivalent. Moreover, the promotion of biogas production would reduce the emissions from other industries in the effort sharing sector by a total of some 0.31 Mt CO2 equivalent by 2030. Measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in agriculture would also have an effect on the land use sector, in which the abovementioned measures could reduce emissions by approximately 1.15 Mt CO2 equivalent by 2030.Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) sectorDirect aid, fully funded by the EU under the Common Agricultural Policy or CAP, is now associated with agri-environmental requirements, and 30 % of direct payments have been linked to greening payments. Farmers must comply with three greening measures on their eligible hectares. Greening payment measures that affect the soil include the requirements of perennial grassland, diversification of cultivation and partly also ecological focus areas. Other measures that fall within the scope of CAP cross-compliance conditions and impact the soil include the prohibition of burning 91stubble and the requirement of plant cover in fallow land. A number of research projects related to the carbon sinks and stocks of agricultural land and the impact of these measures are currently under way. The impacts of the greening payments, cross-compliance conditions and environment payments of the EU™s Common Agricultural Policy on soil carbon stocks in Finland will be examined.The Rural Development Programme for Mainland Finland includes also measures, which affect the soil. These measures are mentioned in the paragraph above (Agriculture).The size of the managed forests sink depends mainly on the forest growth and harvesting rates, resulting from the global demand for e.g. housing and packaging. The objectives of forest use have been reconciled in the National Forest Strategy 2025. Active forest management and use will maintain the forests™ health and ability to grow, which is a basic requisite for their capacity to bind carbon. The National Energy and Climate Strategy emphasised the importance of enhancing the implementation of the National Forest Strategy, especially maintaining good forest health and strengthening the growth and carbon capture capacity of the forests in the long term. The projects implementing the National Forest Strategy has been evaluated and updated during 2018.A significant source of emissions in the land use sector is the clearance of forest for other land use purposes mainly as a result of civil engineering, construction and clearing land for cultivation. Finland is the most forested country in the EU and estimates indicate that the potential for reforestation is limited.A climate programme for the land use sector will be drawn according to the Government Programme. The Finnish Government is already preparing a wide range of additional measures in the land sector to reduce emissions and to enhance removal by sinks. This involves developing guidance instruments and incentives for maintaining and strengthening carbon sinks and storage of forests and soil, safeguarding the management, growth capacity and health of forests, preventing land use change and maintaining and managing growth conditions in agricultural soils. The measures include, for example, promoting continuous plant cover and cultivation techniques to sequester carbon or reduce emissions, implementing a pilot for carbon sequestration and storage markets, promoting the use of diverse forestry and forest management methods, and mitigating deforestation to 92settlements and to cultivation through various means. Due to the early stage of the plan, the impact of such additional measures on the forest land sink cannot yet be estimated. Finland will supplement information on measures and their expected impacts in the future reporting as the information becomes available.Public financing for private forest owners, around EUR 50Œ60 million annually, is based on the Act on the Financing of Sustainable Forestry (34/2015), which states the general objectives of forestry financing: increase the growth of forests, maintain road networks for forestry purposes, secure forest biodiversity and promote the adaptation of forests to climate change. Nature management in commercial forests is promoted through environmental support and forest nature management projects. Private forest owners themselves invested EUR 223 million in 2015 for forest management and improvement work.The impact of the measures on compliance with the LULUCF Regulation needs to be assessed by land use category. The net emission/sink of afforestation and deforestation are calculated in absolute values. The net emission/sink of cropland, grassland, and wetland are compared with the average emission/sink of the period 2005Œ2009. For the managed forest land category, Member States calculate a Forest Reference Level (FRL), against which the net removals or accounted emissions from managed forest land are accounted. The FRL consists of a projection of the managed forest land sink assuming that the forest management practices of the reference period (2000Œ2009) are continued during the compliance period (2021Œ2025). The proposed FRL for managed forest land for the period 2021Œ2025, as detailed in the revised NFAP submission, is -21.16 Mt CO2 equivalent without harvested wood products (HWP) and -27.64 Mt CO2 equivalent with HWP. Due to a cap on accounted net emissions, Finland can benefit only up to 25 Mt CO2 equivalent during 2021Œ2030 if the net removals exceed the FRL. If the net removals are lower than the FRL, Finland can use forest flexibility up to 44 Mt CO2 equivalent during 2021Œ2030, but cannot compensate the emissions from other land use categories. On top of forest flexibility, Finland is permitted to use an additional 10 Mt CO2 equivalent country-specific flexibility. The most recent long-term scenarios suggest that it could be possible for Finland to comply with the no debit requirement of the LULUCF regulation, but there are several uncertainties regarding the estimates (see also section 4.2.1).933.1.2 Renewable energyi. Policies and measures to achieve the national contribution to the binding 2030 Union target for renewable energy and trajectories as referred to in point (a)(2) Article 4, and, where applicable or available, the elements referred to in point 2.1.2, including sector- and technology-specific measuresProduction aid for electricity from renewable energy sourcesThe sliding feed-in tariff system for the production of electricity from renewable energy sources came into force in Finland on 25 March 2011. The aid scheme concerns government support for electricity production based on wind power, biogas and small-scale CHP (wood fuels). The aid scheme has been phased out: It was closed for new power plants from 1 November 2017 for wind power and for biogas and small-scale CHP plants from 1 January 2019. However, the plants under the scheme will receive the aid up to 12 years from the start of production.In May 2018, Parliament approved the Act on the Amendment of the Act on Production Aid for Electricity from Renewable Energy Sources (laki uusiutuvilla energialähteillä tuotetun sähkön tuotantotuesta annetun lain muuttamisesta 441/2018), which lays down provisions on the new premium system. The premium system is based on a competitive tendering process and investments in different renewable energy sources compete with each other so as to take into account the cost-effectiveness target. An auction was held in 2018 and decisions were made in March 2019. The aid was granted for seven projects within total of 1.36 TWh/a worth of annual electricity production. All of the projects concerned wind power. The power plants are expected to start production from 2021 onwards.Under the Energy and Climate Strategy, no new operating aid schemes will be introduced or auctions held.Aid for the use of forest chipsFinland promotes the use of forest chips in combined heat and power generation (CPH) with operating aid for electricity from forest chips. The aid is granted to compensate for the higher production costs of electricity from forest chips compared to fossil fuels. The maximum aid for electricity produced from forest 94chips has been EUR 18/ MWh. However, the aid depends on the price of the emissions allowance and has thus been in decline since the beginning of 2018. When the price of the EU ETS is above EUR 23.7/CO2 tonne, no aid is paid, which has recently been the case. At the beginning of 2019, 53 power plants were within the scope of the aid. New power plants can be approved to the scheme until 1 February 2021 and the aid is paid for up to 12 years from the start of production.Energy Aid SchemeRenewable energy is also promoted through the Energy Aid Scheme (investment subsidy). Aid is primarily targeted at the commercialisation of new technologies and to the non-ETS sector, including plants producing advanced biofuels for transport, and non-ETS electricity and heat production of companies. Aid is paid up to 30 % for mature technologies and up to 40 % for new technology projects. However, aid levels are typically much lower, especially for mature technologies. The objective is that aid for different technologies will be phased out as a technology develops, the costs are reduced and competitiveness improves. The typical annual budget has been EUR 30Œ40 million and this trend is expected to continue in future. However, decisions concerning the state budget are made annually. Since the start of 2019, there has been a separate budget (2019: +EUR 40 million) allocated for large demonstration projects. A similar additional budget has been proposed for 2020. In addition, an aid scheme totalling EUR 90 million has been planned for the early phase out of coal use in energy production. If approved, the aid scheme will be in force 2021Œ2023.Promotion of the use of biofuelsThe Act on Promoting the Use of Biofuels in Transport (laki biopolttoaineiden käytön edistämisestä liikenteessä 446/2007) has been in force since 2008. Under the Act, the share of the energy content of biofuels in the total energy content of the petrol, diesel oil and biofuels delivered by distributors for consumption (i.e. quota obligation) will steadily increase to 20 % by 2020, taking into consideration the double counting rule. The biofuels included in the quota obligation must meet EU sustainability criteria.By 2030, the share of biofuels in road transport will be increased from a physical share of about 13.5 % of energy content by 2020, as required under current 95legislation on the biofuels quota obligation, to 30 %. An act for increasing the quota obligation came into force on 1 April 2019.Furthermore, the quota obligation has been extended to apply to light fuel oil used in heating and machinery so that the share of bioliquids must be at least 10 % by 2028.Energy taxationRenewable energy is also promoted through taxation. While, renewable fuels are not taxed on heat production, fossil fuels are taxed according to their energy content as well as CO2 content. Energy taxation provides an incentive for the use of bioenergy in CHP production and building-specific heat production.In 2015, a legislative change reducing the taxation of small-scale electricity production entered into force. Electricity production plants with a nominal output below 100 kVA and plants larger than that but with an annual production of at most 800,000 kWh were exempted from the obligation to pay electricity tax. These producers may themselves use at the site tax-free the electricity they have generated. If the electricity produced is distributed through the electricity network, the system operator distributing the electricity for consumption will collect the electricity tax on it.TransportThe measures in transport have been listed above (Promotion of the use of biofuels) and in Chapter 3.1.1 under the heading 1) ﬁReplacing fossil fuels with renewable and low-emission fuels and power sourcesﬂ.Energy advisory servicesThe funding allocated to energy advisory services is directed to regional activities (promoting energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy in counties) and communication about demand-side response to consumers. The target groups in the counties are companies, local authorities and citizens. The advisory services implemented in the counties include the promotion of energy efficiency agreements and energy audits, the promotion of municipal renewable energy 96audits in municipalities and companies, energy advisory services for consumers and also support for the strategic promotion of work related to energy and climate issuesii. Where relevant, specific measures for regional cooperation, as well as, as an option, the estimated excess production of energy from renewable sources which could be transferred to other Member States in order to achieve the national contribution and trajectories referred to in point 2.1.2Finland has not concluded any agreements on statistical transfers, joint projects or joint aid schemes with other countries for the coming years.iii. Specific measures on financial support, where applicable including Union support and the use of Union funds, for the promotion of the production and use of energy from renewable sources in electricity, heating and cooling, and transportSee Section 3.1.2.i.iv. Where applicable, the assessment of the support for electricity from renewable sources that Member States are to carry out pursuant to Article 6(4) of Directive (EU) 2018/...Finland has not planned new aid schemes for electricity from renewable energy sources nor are there any plans to revise the old aid schemes. Decisions concerning the operating aid for forest chips (explained in Chapter 3.1.2) will be made in 2020.v. Specific measures to introduce one or more contact points, streamline administrative procedures, provide information and training, and facilitate the uptake of power purchase agreements.Under Article 16 of REDII, the Member States shall set up or designate one or more contact points to guide through and facilitate the administrative permit application and granting process. In addition, the directive requires streamlining administrative procedures. Finland has not yet implemented the abovementioned Article into national law.97The abovementioned directive includes provisions concerning information and training as well as facilitating the uptake of power purchase agreements. There is already a number of measures implemented after REDI that are still in place. These measures are to be revised and if needed, new measures will be implemented. The uptake of power purchase agreements has increased recently especially concerning new wind power projects. However, during the implementation of REDII, it will be assessed whether there is a need for additional measures.Summary of the policies and measures under the enabling framework Member States have to put in place pursuant to Article 21(6) and Article 22(5) of Directive (EU) 2018/... to promote and facilitate the development of renewable self-consumption and renewable energy communitiesAs described in Chapter 3.1.2. the key concepts to promote energy communities have been identified in the work of the Smart Grid Working Group in 2018 set up by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment. Key concepts include energy community within one property, typically an apartment block, energy community crossing property limits and virtual energy community.The Government has commissioned a study on the unjustified barriers concerning self-consumption and renewable energy communities. The study is expected to be completed by the end of 2019. If unjustified barriers are found, an assessment will be made as to whether they can be removed.In addition, there is a Rural Development Programme in force described in Section 3.1.2.i.vi. Assessment of the necessity to build new infrastructure for district heating and cooling produced from renewable sourcesA decision to invest in the construction of new district heating or district cooling infrastructure is typically based on demand. In Finland, district heating networks have been built at almost all sites where it is economically viable to do so. Even very small networks have been built to connect, for example, public buildings in small built-up areas. New investments are mainly related to the establishment of entirely new areas. The fuel or energy source used to produce the energy for the district heating or district cooling does not play a key role.98vii. Where applicable, specific measures on the promotion of the use of energy from biomass, especially for new biomass mobilisation taking into account: ˝biomass availability, including sustainable biomass: both domestic potential and imports from third countries ˝other biomass uses by other sectors (agriculture and forest-based sectors); as well as measures for the sustainability of biomass production and useThe use of wood-based fuels in Finland is mainly based on industrial side streams and such energy fractions created in connection with forest management work and felling for which there is no demand in the forest industry processes. The aim is to direct these biomass fractions to power and heat generation and to the manufacture of transport biofuels. In Finland, the use of wood-based fuels as a whole is promoted by the emissions trading system, the operating aid for electricity from forest chips, the taxation of fossil fuels and peat, and the aid schemes encouraging forest management, such as the sustainable forestry aid scheme designed for private forest owners. About one tenth of the raw materials used in the forest industry is imported, so the corresponding proportion of the generation of renewable energy based on industrial side streams is based on imported wood. Imports are not expected to account for a significant share of the total amounts of wood-based fuels in future, either.The sustainability of the production of biomasses is regulated in REDII. Member States must bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions by 30 June 2021 derived from the directive and Finland has started the implementation process. Finland has legislation and monitoring systems in in place to minimise the risk of unsustainable forest biomass production. The most important law ensuring the sustainability of forest management in Finland is the Forest Act. The requirements concerning legality of harvesting operations (i) and forest regeneration of harvested areas (ii) are included in the Forest Act. Other relevant acts are the Forest Damages Prevention Act, The Timber Measurement Act and The Act on the Placing on the Market of Timber and Timber Products, which implements EU Timber Regulation No 995/2010 in Finland. Concerning the objectives to minimise negative impacts on biodiversity and soil (iv) and protection of forests (iii), also environmental legislation has a key role. Roughly 2.7 million 99hectares of forests are protected or under restricted use, which is 12 % of the total forest area in Finland. The sustainability of forest management is assessed and monitored on the basis of Pan-European Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management. The National Forest Inventory (NFI), the monitoring system for forests and forest resources, produces diverse information on Finnish forests. NFI results are widely used in assessing the sustainability of forest management.In agriculture, the potential in energy production lies especially in utilising biomass-based side streams of agriculture for CHP generation, as transport fuel and in solar electricity. The majority of the biogas potential is associated with farming. There has been wide interest in increasing biogas production on farms or from agricultural biomasses for some time. While farms have plenty of biomasses suitable for biogas production, these biomasses have so far only been utilised to a minor extent. The reason for this is that yield/cost analyses have been unable to identify adequate numbers of cost-effective applications. In addition, profitable concepts for costly plants have been hard to find. Achieving profitability is particularly difficult if costs are incurred for the raw material. Typically, biogas production on farms has advantages that are not directly associated with energy economy, including more efficient nutrient recycling, cutting greenhouse gas emissions, improved hygiene and reduced odour nuisances. Circular economy-related benefits are often in a key role.The Government during 2015Œ2019 funded more than 70 research and development projects during the last four years to promote biomass nutrient recycling enhancing actions of SMEs and research institutes as well as communicate and inform about the benefits of nutrient recycling and importance of bio-waste separation and food waste reduction. The Government of Prime Minister Sanna Marin has decided to prepare a national biogas programme to improve Finland™s vitality and to achieve Finland™s climate targets.3.1.3 Other elements of the dimensioni. Where applicable, national policies and measures affecting the EU ETS sector and assessment of the complementarity and impacts on the EU ETS100ii. Policies and measures to achieve other national targets, where applicableiii. Policies and measures to achieve low-emission mobility (including electrification of transport)iv. Where applicable, national policies, timelines and measures planned to phase out energy subsidies, in particular for fossil fuelsActivities related to technology-neutral support for electricity production and energy taxation are described in Chapter 3.1.2 above. In addition, the Energy and Climate Strategy for 2030 (2016) already outlined that Finland will phase out the use of coal for energy by 2030. No new power plants burning hard or brown coal will be built, nor will any replacement investments based on coal be made. Once the existing plants based on pulverised fuel combustion have been decommissioned, coal will only be used as a backup fuel in exceptional situations.On 1 April 2019, the Government passed an act banning the use of coal in energy production as of 1 May 2029. The ban will reduce the use of coal by an estimated 3 TWh compared to market-based development without the ban. A special incentive package to support replacement investments is under preparation for those district heating companies in towns and cities that undertake to give up the use of coal by as early as 2025.The measures in transport have been listed in the Chapter 3.1.1 under the headings 2) ﬁImproving the energy efficiency of vehicles and other means of transportﬂ and 3) ﬁImproving the energy efficiency of the transport systemﬂ.The main aid schemes concerning renewable energy in Finland have been the operating aid scheme and energy aid scheme. The operating aid scheme consists of a feed-in tariff for renewable electricity, aid for the use of forest chips and premium system, which have been explained in more detail in Chapter 3.1.2. The feed-in tariff scheme concerning wind power, biogas and small-scale CHP has been phased out and no new power plants are accepted to the scheme. Aid for the use of forest chips has not been paid since December 2018 due to the current level of EU ETS prices. No decisions on continuation of aid for the use of forest chips after 2021 have been made. In the premium system, there has only been one auction round and 101according to the current plan, there will be no new auction rounds. All power plants within the abovementioned schemes may receive aid for up to 12 years.There are no plans to phase out the energy aid scheme. However, according to the national Energy- and Climate Strategy as well as the Government Programme, the focus is more on new energy technology projects. Therefore, while the budget for the scheme is estimated to stay at the same level or even increase, the aid for mature technologies will be reduced.Energy subsidies that are considered environmentally harmful are reported in Table 12. The assessment of environmentally harmful subsidies is based on the evaluation tool developed by the OECD and previous Finnish studies on the subject. The vast majority of environmentally harmful energy subsidies are tax expenditure items targeted at lowering the cost of energy consumption in industry, transport and agriculture sectors. The benchmarks depend each time on the tax expenditure concerned and are not fully comparable with each other. The two largest environmentally harmful subsidies are the reduced electricity tax rate for industry, data centres and greenhouses, which is usually considered together with the energy tax refunds for energy-intensive enterprises, and the reduced energy tax rate for gas fuel used in transport mobile machinery. The figures are based on actual data or estimates for 2018, up-to-date budget data or estimates for 2019 and budget proposal data estimates for 2020.Most of the environmentally harmful energy tax expenditure items remain almost constant over the period because there are no tax rule changes affecting them. An exception to this general trend is the amount of energy tax refunds for agriculture, which shrinks from 2018 to 2020, because the tax refund increases decided for 2018Œ2019 do not continue to 2020. The compensation subsidy for the indirect costs of emission trading is expected to grow somewhat markedly with the rising market price of emission allowances.102Table 12. Environmentally harmful energy subsidies 2018Œ2020 [mill. euro].2018Budget 2019Budget proposal 2020Energy tax refunds for energy-intensive enterprises222225235Reduced electricity tax rate for industry, data centres and greenhouses625630633Reduced energy tax rate for peat180194196Compensation subsidy for indirect costs of emission trading273078Reduced energy tax rate for diesel used in transport422419389Reduced energy tax rate for gas oil used in transport mobile machinery464456451Energy tax refunds for agriculture625535There is no established view in Finland on which energy subsidies are considered fossil fuel subsidies. One of the reasons for this is that many of the environmentally harmful energy subsidies mentioned in Table 12 do not make any distinction per se whether the energy consumption is based on fossil energy sources or renewable sources. Many of the environmentally harmful energy subsidies in Table 12 nevertheless fall partially - or in the case of reduced energy tax rate for peat where the aforementioned distinction is made, wholly - upon the consumption of energy that was produced by burning fossil fuels.In connection with the budget negotiations of the 2020 budget, the Government announced that it intends to launch preparatory work aimed making cuts to environmentally harmful subsidies and redirect the funds released to more productive and sustainable uses. Decisions based on this preparatory work are scheduled for autumn 2020. Initially, tax expenditures will be reduced by phasing out the tax reduction for paraffinic diesel