3.5 Dimension research, innovation and competitivenessi. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.5ii. Where applicable, cooperation with other Member States in this area, including, where appropriate, information on how the SET-Plan objectives and policies are being translated to a national contextiii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union fundsFinland supports research, innovation and competitiveness in energy technology with a number of measures, of which energy aid is crucial. Based on project assessments, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment and Business Finland may grant energy aid to companies, municipalities and other organisations for investment and research projects that promote the use of renewable energy or energy efficiency.The purpose of energy aid is particularly to promote the introduction and placing on the market of new energy technologies. Energy aid plays an important role in the innovation chain when the development of the technologies is already advanced and the first commercial targets are sought. The competitiveness of companies operating in Finland and the creation of new jobs can thus be supported in this way. Energy aid can be granted to companies, municipalities and other communities. The aid is not granted, for example, to housing companies, residential properties or farms.The primary purpose of the aid is to enhance the profitability of early-stage investment and minimise the risks associated with the introduction of new technology.126In 2018, the grant authority for energy aid was EUR 55 million in the central government budget. The budget authority for energy aid is established annually in the central government budget. In recent years, aid has also been granted for certain specific purposes through separate budget reserves. The Government allocated a total of EUR 100 million for investments in renewable energy and new technologies for the period 2016Œ2018.At the beginning of this decade, the Finnish Funding Agency for Innovation Tekes invested heavily in SHOK programmes (Strategic Centres for Science, Technology and Innovation). Of the energy and environmental sector programmes, SGEM (Smart Grid and Energy Markets) has produced significant competence that can be utilised in the development of intelligent electricity networks and smart control. The FLEXe programme (Flexible Energy Systems) initiated an examination of the requirements for a flexible energy system. Companies have taken the lead in utilising the programme™s research findings. The project, completed in 2016, investigated the building of an intelligent and flexible energy system in the Åland Islands.Business Finland™s Smart Energy programme was launched in 2018. It develops test platforms and innovation ecosystems that boost the competitiveness of Finnish companies and exports of Finnish expertise in the growing international markets and also attracts investments to Finland. The ecosystems will open up opportunities also for SMEs to enter energy markets, in which large investments are necessary.The development of new business and new solutions requires opportunities for experimentation. Test platforms provide an opportunity to conduct experiments and pilots, and to implement research and development projects in the programme focus areas. These include smart networks, renewable energy, energy efficiency, sustainable and smart energy solutions and systems, their related products and services, and resources-wise solutions based on user needs. Instead of developing an individual technology, the intention is to develop ecosystems and integrate technology into a smart system. The aim is to create in Finland several test platforms that are internationally attractive and will also bring investments to Finland.The importance of Mission Innovation cooperation is growing. Finland was accepted to the Mission Innovation initiative in October 2016. When joining, 127Finland committed to doubling public innovation funding for clean energy by 2020. The baseline was the average of the funding granted by TEKES to projects on renewable energy sources, storage of energy, energy systems and energy networks between 2013 and 2015, plus the average of the energy aid allocated to new energy technologies in the same theme areas over the same time period by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment. Calculated in this way, the baseline of public funding for RD&I in clean energy settled at EUR 54.7 million, which would be EUR 109.4 million when doubled in accordance with the objective. Doubling also takes into account the demonstration aid for new technologies allocated to the key projects in the field of energy. This was EUR 20 million in 2016 and EUR 40 million in 2017 and 2018. Finland is quite well on track with the Mission Innovation cooperation doubling target towards EUR 109.4 million in 2021, since the contribution in 2018 was EUR 92.9 million and the increase from the baseline was almost 70 %.Finland also participates in Clean Energy Ministerial (CEM) cooperation, the first meeting of which was held in Washington in 2010. The participating countries account for about 80 % of global energy use. A central part of CEM™s operation consists of initiatives covering the following themes: bioenergy, CCS, energy and women, Clean Energy Solutions Centre, electric vehicles, energy efficiency, smart electricity network, solar and wind energy, solar energy and LED, hydropower and sustainable development. Finland participates in the Electric Vehicles and Smart Grids initiatives. Finland has also joined the 21st Century Power Partnership initiative, the Women in Energy (C3E) initiative and the until 30 campaign related to it, and the campaign promoting the more flexible use of power plants and electric transport between cities (Pilot City Programme).Finland Œ China (Business Finland Œ MoST) joint call related clean energy collaboration was opened at the end of 2018. The Joint Call in Smart Energy theme with Germany was launched and 10 joint projects were funded.Finland has also been actively involved in the operation of the SET-Plan. The SET-Plan combines the promotion and better coordination of energy technology in the EU and the EEA countries. A total of 14 implementation plans were prepared in the SET-Plan between 2016 and 2018. Finland has participated actively in the preparation and introduction of these implementation plans. Finland has chaired and co-chaired the preparation of two implementation plans (Action 6 and Action 1288) and continues to chair the related Implementation Working Groups. A good example of the flexibility of the SET-Plan is the eBattery plan. Finland participates in the implementation of the plan and has also strengthened its own activities, for example, through Business Finland™s ﬂBatteries from Finlandﬂ 2018Œ2020 activation programme. Finland has launched an ecosystem type of consortium named BatCircle, involving more than 30 companies, universities and research institutes. Finland is also active in Set-Plan key action no 7. ﬁBatteries for e-Mobility and Stationary Storageﬂ, where Finland is leading the working group related to battery recycling. This is a good example of how SET-Plan objectives and policies are translated into national use.Business Finland, the Finnish funding organisation for innovation, is actively advancing ecosystems promoting low-carbon business like funding so-called Growth Engines. The name Growth Engine describes cooperation networks ˝ ecosystems ˝ aimed at new business activities amounting to more than EUR 1 billion. Growth Engines are implemented through an enterprise-driven partnership model between companies, research organisations and public actors, which strive to find solutions to global market disruption and create new growth sectors in Finland.Growth Engine funding enables collaboration between companies of different sizes, research organisations and public actors to achieve a common concrete business goal, launching a new operator, a platform company to achieve a business goal and the construction of the platform company™s business.The Government has allocated EUR 60 million of capital funding for Growth Engines in 2018 (EUR 30 million) and 2019 (EUR 30 million). In addition, Business Finland channels its normal funding (about EUR 200 million 2018Œ19) and services to projects that meet the ambitious and funding criteria of companies, research organisations and communities operating in Growth Engines, aiming at achieving a Growth Engine™s business objective.Growth Engines currently operate in the fields of carbon compensation, smart port and marine services, artificial intelligence and new solutions for a societal scale model of renewable energy production.