3.3 Dimension energy securityi. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.3Point 2.3 not only describes the national objectives with regard to energy security but also includes some of the measures applied to energy security. In energy security, it is not always easy to separate the objectives form the respective measures.The measures mentioned and described in point 2.3 include: ˝The National Emergency Supply Agency holds imported fuels in state-owned reserves to last for an average of ˚ve months™ normal consumption. ˝Of the Nordic countries, Finland has agreements concerning security of supply with Sweden and Norway.In addition to the measures described in point 2.3, some further measures are listed below.ElectricityFinnish generation adequacy is affected by the development of regional electricity markets. According to the SKM Market Predictor™s report29, the Nordic power 113balance will strengthen in the 2020s due to increases in the generation of wind power and nuclear energy. Overall, the supply of electricity is predicted to increase by 70 TWh, while the demand for electricity is estimated to grow by only 45 TWh in the Nordics by 2030. Thus, electricity exports from the Nordics will increase by 2030, particularly to the UK and Germany.As for ensuring generation adequacy in the light of the renewable energy contribution, including demand response and storage, the Finnish strategic reserve system plays a significant role. The strategic reserve system is open to participation from demand response facilities as well. The power reserve system39 (strategic reserve) ensures security of the electricity supply in Finland in situations in which the market-driven production of electricity does not cover consumption. The system has been in use since the beginning of 2007. Both power plants and facilities capable of demand-side flexibility can participate in the power reserve. The Energy Authority defines the size of the power reserve required in Finland, organises the competitive tendering process for plants to be included in the reserve, confirms the terms of the reserve and monitors the operation of the system and compliance with the law. The total power reserve capacity over the period 1 July 2017 Œ 30 June 2020 is 729 MW. Thus, the national target for the security of supply related to the adequacy of electric power has been defined indirectly through the size of the power reserve. The National Energy and Climate Strategy outlines that the Government will define the target for the security of electricity supply associated with the adequacy of electric power according to the EU™s Electricity Regulation. The target will be defined once the Commission has approved the methodology compliant with the Regulation.Demand response and storage are further promoted by applying the proposals by the Smart Grid Working Group as discussed in Chapter 3.4.3. These initiatives include the definition of the improved functionalities of next-generation smart meters and the discontinuation of the flexibility implemented by distribution network operators to encourage market-based initiatives. Overall, the proposals by the Smart Grid Working Group highlight the significance of market-based solutions for demand response and storage.39 The act on the power reserve ensuring balance between generation and consumption of electricity (117/2011). http://finlex.fi/fi/laki/ajantasa/2011/20110117114Finland has imposed binding reliability standards on distribution system operators to ensure resilience in electricity distribution networks, especially in severe weather conditions. The Electricity Market Act (588/2013) sets out limits for power outages following extreme weather conditions. Under the Electricity Market Act, distribution networks must be designed and built in a way that the longest permitted interruptions in electricity supply are a maximum of 6 hours in urban areas and a maximum of 36 hours in rural areas. The electricity distribution companies are free to choose the measures they employ to meet these obligations. One possible measure is to replace overhead power lines with underground power cables. These requirements are to be met stepwise by 2028. By the end of 2019, 50 % of the distribution network must be within the time limits provided by the Electricity Market Act. Already now a significant decrease in outage durations and the number of customers affected by outages has been observed.Electricity transmission power lines are already built so that storms or snow do not disrupt power transmission.Regulation (EU) 2019/941 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector and repealing Directive 2005/89/EC is also an integral part of the energy security dimension. The Regulation sets out the rules governing cooperation between Member States to prevent, prepare for and manage electricity crisis situations. Cooperation is carried out in the spirit of solidarity and transparency, taking fully into account the requirements of the competitive market for electricity. The Regulation includes provisions related to the assessment of risks in the security of electricity supply, drawing up risk-preparedness plans in case the risks are realised, the management of electricity crisis situations, ex-post evaluation of the crisis situations and different types of monitoring.Under the Regulation, the competent authority in each Member State, including Finland, should publish a preparedness plan based on national electricity crisis scenarios. The preparedness plan should include all planned or introduced measures to prevent, prepare for or mitigate an electricity crisis situation. The preparedness plan should also include regional and bilateral measures to ensure that electricity crises with cross-border effects are appropriately prevented and managed.115Finland will prepare and publish its own preparedness plan according to the timetable defined in the Regulation.The National Emergency Supply Agency has been actively promoting cybersecurity in the energy sector by carrying out sector-specific cybersecurity exercises, programmes and sharing best practices. One example is KYBER-ENE project40 which was carried out together with energy sector companies and VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd.GasIn 2017, the National Emergency Supply Agency as the competent authority prepared plans for the prevention of risks in the security of supply of natural gas (prevention plan) and for actions to be taken in the event of disruptions in supply (emergency plan). The natural gas section of the Oil pool, a part of Finland™s security of supply organisation, has also been engaged in the work. The plans are based on the repealed regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning measures to safeguard security of gas supply (994/2010). Concerning the implementation of the risk preparedness regulation and the preventive action and emergency plans for gas, Finland is part of the risk group which includes also Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The preventive action and emergency plans have been actively prepared by the group.The prevention plans and emergency plans complying with the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council EU No 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard security of gas supply and repealing Regulation (EU) No 994/2010 (Security of Gas Supply Regulation) must be published and the Commission must be informed of them at the latest on 1 March 2019. The Commission informs the Gas Coordination Group (GCG) of notifications concerning the plans and publishes them on the Commission™s website. The plans were published41 and the Commission was informed on 30 October 2019. Plans were made in close cooperation with the Baltic states.40 https://www.huoltovarmuuskeskus.fi/energia-ala-kehitti-yhteiset-toimintatavat-kyberuhkia-vastaan/41 https://cdn.huoltovarmuuskeskus.fi/app/uploads/2019/10/31111328/Finland-gas-preventive-action-plan-and-emergency-plan.pdf116The security of natural gas supply in Finland has been good and there have been no significant disruptions in the supply over the past twenty years. In the event of a disruption in Finland™s largest single gas infrastructure, the remaining infrastructure will be able to satisfy the total demand for gas for 24 hours during peak consumption.In Finland, the most challenging situation in terms of the supply norm set in the Regulation would be a situation in which the procurement of gas from Russia to Finland is completely interrupted for a longer period of time. During long-term disruption in the gas supply, biogas or LNG injected into the network would be supplied to protected gas customers, i.e. households that have joined the distribution network.Balticconnector, the gas pipeline connecting the gas networks of Finland and Estonia, will come on stream on 1 January 2020.Finland has implemented projects to build import terminals for liquefied natural gas: the first terminal was completed in Pori in autumn 2016 and the second one was completed in Tornio in 2019. There are no plans to connect these terminals to the gas transmission network. The LNG terminal to be constructed in Hamina will be connected to the local supply network and is estimated to be in use in 2020.Most of the natural gas consumption can quickly be replaced by alternative forms of energy or by switching to an alternative fuel. Fuels that can replace natural gas primarily include light and heavy fuel oil and, for gas-specific use, liquefied petroleum gas, LNG and biogas that is injected into the natural gas network. One alternative in disruptions in the availability of natural gas may also be to adapt production or to interrupt it.Users of natural gas, except for consumer customers, are primarily responsible for their own preparedness plans and the operability of the reserve fuel systems possibly related to them, the buffer stocks of reserve fuel and the organisation of the required transports.To prepare for any disruptions in the availability of imported energy and to meet its commitments under international obligations, Finland keeps reserves of imported fuel covering an average of five months™ normal consumption. This amount does 117not include natural gas consumption by industry. As regards natural gas, the reserves comprise compulsory stockpiles by companies and state-owned reserves.ii. Regional cooperation in this areaRegional cooperation in the field of energy security is carried out in the Electricity Market Group operating under the Nordic Council of Ministers. Among other things, the working group monitors the estimations ENTSO-E and the Nordic transmission system operators make of the adequacy of electric power.Cooperation related to the security of gas supply is carried out between the authorities in Finland and the Baltic states. The authorities have drawn up contingency plans for the gas supply.General cooperation related to the security of energy supply is carried out between the Nordic emergency supply organisations (NordBER, Nordisk Beredskapsforum).iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union fundsThe emergency stockpiling of imported fuels is financed through a strategic stockpile fee. No specific requirements regarding the security of supply are related to biofuels. However, a strategic stockpile fee is also levied on biofuels