1605 IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF PLANNED POLICIES AND MEASURES5.1 Impacts of planned policies and measures described in section 3 on energy system and GHG emissions and removals including comparison to projections with existing policies and measures (as described in section 4)i. Projections of the development of the energy system and GHG emissions and removals as well as, where relevant of emissions of air pollutants in accordance with Directive EU 2016/2284 under the planned policies and measures at least until ten years after the period covered by the plan (including for the last year of the period covered by the plan), including relevant Union policies and measures.Figure 2 and Figure 10 show the development of greenhouse gas emissions and removals in the WEM and WAM projections. The WEM projection estimates that the total greenhouse gas emissions (excluding LULUCF) in 2020 and in 2030 will be 53 and 44 Mt CO2 equivalent respectively, whereas the WAM projection assesses that they will be 52 and 39 Mt CO2 equivalent, respectively.Finland is in the course of reaching its EU 2020 emissions reduction goal and its corresponding emissions reduction obligation under the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol with existing policy measures. The effect of the additional measures is aimed at the 2020s and in full by 2030 at the latest. With the measures in the WAM projection, the renewable energy share will rise to above 50 % of gross final energy consumption and the use of imported oil for domestic 161needs will be halved by 2030 compared to the 2005 level. The use of coal in energy production will end by 2029.The ban on coal in energy production will impact the energy system. Coal CHP plants will mainly be replaced by heat-only boilers using biomass. The use of forest chips is expected to increase by 2.0Œ2.8 TWh. Market-based development of coal use would lead to a 200 MW decrease in coal CHP generation capacity during 2025Œ2030. The ban on coal as a result of legislation will further decrease CHP generation capacity by 300 MW. This reduces the flexibility of the electricity system and the generation adequacy between supply and demand will be tighter. The ban on coal by 2029 will also have a marginal impact on power prices, EUR 0.1Œ0.3 per MWh depending on the fuel price scenarios.Even though the electricity demand increases steadily in the WAM projection, electricity generation by district heating CHP plants is likely to decrease. In the 2020s wind and solar power are expected to be competitive and grow their share of generation. Figure 21 shows the development of the electricity supply in the WAM projection until 2030.The dependency of electricity imports in particular at peak load situations remains a challenge in the 2020s despite investments in smart grid solutions and system flexibility. Further measures will be considered in the coming years.16202040608010019902000201020202030TWhNet importCondense powerImport or condense powerNuclear powerCHP industryWind power and PVHydro powerTotal demandFigure 21.    Development of electricity demand and supply in the WAM projection.The planned transport sector policy to increase the number of electric vehicles to 250,000 by 2030 significantly increases the amount of electricity used by the sector (Figure 22). At the end of the 2020s, electricity demand of road transport will equal that of the railways. Thereafter road transport electricity is expected to double by 2040. Total use of electricity in the transport sector is not more than 1Œ2 % of the total electricity demand during the assessed period. Its impact on electricity generation is small on a yearly level, but charging batteries and active use of them as two-way electricity storage can affect both the short-term electricity market and the local grid. Thus, electric vehicles can, with clear rules and developed market solutions, contribute to an overall efficient and advanced energy system.16300,20,40,60,812015202020252030TWhRailwaysRoad transportFigure 22.    Development of the use of electricity in the transport sector in the WAM projection.ii. Assessment of policy interactions (between existing policies and measures and planned policies and measures within a policy dimension and between existing policies and measures and planned policies and measures of different dimensions) at least until the last year of the period covered by the plan, in particular to establish a robust understanding of the impact of energy efficiency / energy savings policies on the sizing of the energy system and to reduce the risk of stranded investment in energy supply.The new premium system for renewable electricity increases annual electricity generation by (only) 1.4 TWh, which can well be integrated in the existing power system. The premium system plays an important role in contributing to the market-based deployment of wind power in the future. Large-scale integration of variable renewable energy into the energy system requires greater system flexibility. There is a need for a variety of service providers and for more diversified markets, for 164which a number of proposals have been presented in the report of the Smart Grid Working Group56.Installation of large wind farms requires the electricity grid to be strengthened at both the local and national grid level. Electricity companies must develop the network according to customers™ reasonable needs. In addition, as the use of energy in society as a whole shifts increasingly to electricity, electricity demand increases and there is a continuous need to invest in network infrastructure. Therefore, in relation to the network infrastructure, there is no risk of stranded costs, rather the opposite.The 1.4 TWh subsidised production slightly weakens the profitability of existing power plants as they cannot sell quite as much electricity as before. In addition, the spot price drops slightly, which reduces the returns of all electricity producers. This renewable energy measure is not considered to be of any importance to the energy security dimension and the direct impact on the internal market dimension is also marginal, see also Chapter 4.5.Finland has imposed binding reliability standards on distribution system operators to ensure resilience in electricity distribution networks, especially in severe weather conditions. One possible measure for the DSOs is to replace overhead power lines with underground cables. The Finnish Energy (an association representing the energy industry, including DSOs) has estimated that this measure will release an area of 40,000 hectares for afforestation. Thus, replacing medium-voltage overhead power lines with underground cables could have a policy interaction with carbon sinks in the longer term.The planned Datahub facilitates the development of services that are related to small-scale electricity production, the creation of energy communities, etc. This is expected to speed up the deployment of small-scale electricity production and thus supports the low-carbon dimension. An increase in small-scale electricity production that is used on site results in lesser billing for distribution companies and suppliers. Consequently, it is likely that distribution companies will change the 56 https://tem.fi/documents/1410877/2132296/%C3%84lyverkkoty%C3%B6ryhm%C3%A4n_keskeiset_ehdotukset_241018/3800ce98-68bc-da20-52e9-494722cfc2bd/%C3%84lyverkkoty%C3%B6ryhm%C3%A4n_keskeiset_ehdotukset_241018.pdf; https://tem.fi/alyverkot165structure of distribution tariffs over time so that they emphasise less the energy component and introduce capacity-based components.The ban on the use of coal in energy production is good for the low carbon dimension but not necessarily favourable for the energy security dimension, at least with regard to security of electricity supply. The ban on coal in 2029 as a result of legislation will decrease CHP generation capacity by 300 MW. This will reduce the flexibility of the electricity system and the generation adequacy between supply and demand will be tighter. The policy measure will result in a slight increase in the market price of electricity, see Chapter 5.4.Policies and measures for the dimension of decarbonisation, such as biofuels/bioliquids quota obligations for the transport and heating sectors, requires the development of new technologies. Thus, the dimension of decarbonisation has policy interactions with the dimension of research, innovation and competitiveness.As an additional consideration, building sector projections show that improvement in the energy efficiency of buildings reduces the use of district heating. This development is likely to occur even if the total building volume increases. As the district heating network has already been fully built, there is a risk that the number of paying customers will be insufficient to maintain the district heating infrastructure. The problem is even accelerated if district heating customers chose to disconnect and switch to decentralised heating such as e.g. heat pumps. Consequently, it is important to ensure the competitiveness of district heating and CHP.iii. Assessment of interactions between existing policies and measures and planned policies and measures, and Union climate and energy policy measures.All the measures implemented and planned in all the five dimensions that Finland has indicated in this report are either related to the implementation of EU legislation or contribution to achieving the EU™s energy and climate targets. The policy measures will ensure that Finland takes care of its own share and contributes adequately to the EU™s common energy and climate goals. The policy measures also ensure that Finland is also on the path to achieving long-term goals by 2050.1665.2 Macroeconomic and, to the extent feasible, the health, environmental, employment and education, skills and social impacts including just transition aspects (in terms of costs and benefits as well as cost-effectiveness) of the planned policies and measures described in section 3 at least until the last year of the period covered by the plan, including comparison to projections with existing policies and measures.The impact assessment of NECP is based on two separate impact assessments reports, one prepared for the Finland™s National Energy and Climate Strategy57 from 2016 and the other prepared for the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan (KAISU)58 from 2017. In addition, Finland™s National Energy and Climate Strategy and Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan both include one chapter on impact assessments. In the Energy and Climate Strategy it is Chapter 4, including also impacts on the national economy (Chapter 4.5) and environmental impacts including also, for example, the quantity of air impurities (Chapter 4.6). Chapter 13 of the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan is about the impacts of the policy plan, including economic impacts and also the impact on the national economy (Chapter 13.2), impacts on human health and the environment (Chapter 13.3) and impacts on security (Chapter 13.4). These documents are available also in English 5 and 6.The conclusion of the impact assessments of the National Energy and Climate Strategy is that the proposed actions and measures allow Finland to reach the targets of the EU Effort Sharing Decision and national targets to increase renewable energy, to reduce fossil fuel consumption, and to increase self-sufficiency of energy consumption. The largest share of additional emission reductions would be 57 https://tietokayttoon.fi/julkaisu?pubid=16902 (in Finnish).58 https://tietokayttoon.fi/julkaisu?pubid=21004 (in Finnish).167achieved in the transport sector followed by a reduction in emissions from the oil heating of buildings, work machinery, waste management, F-gases and agriculture.Realisation of the targets of the Energy and Climate Strategy affects economic steering and the national economy. According to the impact assessments, the gross domestic product would be 0.6 %-points lower than the baseline in 2030. Employment would grow by over 3 % by 2030 compared to 2015, but would remain 0.15 %-points lower than in the baseline.By 2030, investments will fall by less than 1 % compared to the WEM projection. Private consumption will fall by about 0.4 % compared to the WEM projection, mainly due to the rise in the average price of transport fuels and cars, which will weaken purchasing power. Rising domestic prices will weaken export competitiveness and reduce exports by more than 1 % compared to the WEM projection, but compared to 2015, growth will still be over 40 %. The measures in the WAM projection change the structure of both demand and production compared to the WEM projection. However, the changes are not very dramatic.Forest biomass is the largest growing renewable energy source from 2015 to 2030. The impact assessment of Finland™s National Energy and Climate Strategy from 2016 concludes that the existing felling potential in Finnish forests will be large enough to supply the estimated needs of both the forest and energy industries, and since a major share of wood fuels are derived from the by-products of the forest industry, Finnish forests will remain a carbon sink. Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke) has updated scenarios for carbon sinks based on new data on forest growth.59 The study was published in February 2019 and partly updated in autumn 2019.According to the impact assessments of the Energy and Climate Strategy and the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan, they will affect climate change, nature™s biodiversity and water basins, air pollution, health and living conditions. The details of the practical implementation are essential since these will influence how increased harvesting affects biodiversity and what welfare impacts different population groups will experience. According to the impact assessments, increased 59 Development of emissions and sinks in the agricultural and LULUCF sectors until 2050 (in Finnish) http://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/161408/20-2019-MALULU_.pdf168wood use may potentially have negative impacts on biodiversity, but this depends, for example, on how additional felling is carried out and on what measures are taken to prevent adverse effects. The effects of an increase in biofuel production will highly depend on the raw feedstocks used for production. The impacts on biodiversity can be mitigated by introducing new incentives to uphold the biodiversity of forests. This can be done by several means, such as leaving dead trees to a greater extent in regeneration areas and avoiding fellings in valuable nature areas.In the impact assessment of the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan, the assessments of the measures of the non-ETS sector under the effort sharing regulation have been updated and extended. According to the results of the energy system model TIMES, a realistic overall emission reduction potential compared to the baseline (WEM projection) totals 5.1Œ6.8 Mt COˆ equivalent in 2030. The largest potentials are identified in transport, but there are also substantial uncertainties regarding these emissions reductions and associated costs. Additional emissions reductions are achievable especially through decreasing the use of mineral oil in the heating of buildings and in fuel use of work machines. An increased share of biofuels in transport, heating and machinery is the most significant individual measure. In total, the KAISU measures have only a minimal impact on the growth of gross domestic product. In combination with other policy measures, the KAISU measures affect the environment, people™s health and living conditions in many ways. The level of impacts depends on many factors, making the anticipation of impacts uncertain. Careful monitoring is therefore needed to verify the reaching of targets and other impacts.Economic impacts of policies and measures have also been reported in Chapter 5.5. of Finland™s Seventh National Communication under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change12. The information in the Seventh National Communication is based on the situation at the end of 2017 and the impacts of the policy measures of Finland™s National Energy and Climate Strategy. The results related to the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan on the macroeconomic level are very similar to those of the National Energy and Climate Strategy.A dynamic applied general equilibrium model that describes the economy from the perspective of decisions made by households, companies and the public sector is used for the economic impact assessment.169Table 24 shows the impact of the WAM measures on the national economy in 2030 in comparison to the WEM projection.Table 24. Impact of the WAM measures on the national economy in 2030.Change compared to the WEM projection [percent]Impact on the domestic product compared to the WEM projection [percentage point]Domestic product-0.59Private consumption-0.40-0.23Investments-0.85-0.10Public consumption0.000.00Exports-1.75-0.76Imports-1.330.49Water impacts resulting from climate change mitigation measures are closely related to the development of wood use. When forestry is intensified, the effects will be in the same direction as with the more severe climate. Both increase the load on the water. Nitrogen and phosphorus loads cause eutrophication of waterways and solids loads cause turbidity, silting and overgrowth. Increasing logging in line with the objectives of the Energy and Climate Strategy will increase the load on the water.Most of the serious health hazards associated with air pollution are caused by small particles. The largest domestic sources of small particles are small-scale wood combustion, road traffic, including both exhaust and street dust, and machinery. Burning wood in fireplaces and stoves reduces air quality, especially in densely built areas of small houses. The small particles emissions from wood burning cause premature deaths and increase the incidence of illness just as the small particles in traffic. Small-scale wood combustion is also an important source of black carbon emissions. The relative share from wood burning is growing as the other sources such as transport are becoming less important. No significant reduction in small particulate emissions from small-scale wood burning can be foreseen without noticeable technological changes in the equipment used.Exposure to particles from small-scale combustion will decrease slightly in the future, but there is only a minor difference between the WEM and WAM projections. In the transport sector, the shift towards increased use of electricity and gas is 170reflected in improved air quality in urban areas. In the current situation, the biggest air quality-related mortality effects in Finland are caused by long-term exposure to small particles of small-scale combustion and street dust, each causing about 200 premature deaths per year.All of the air pollutants considered will be significantly reduced from 2015 to 2030, although overall energy use will increase. Emissions reductions for combustion installations and the transport sector are largely the result of EU legislation coming into or already in force. The major impact of fuel changes is the reduction in the use of coal, which significantly reduces sulphur and nitrogen oxide emissions, and the increased use of wood in combustion plants, which, despite tightening emission limits, may slightly increase nitrous oxide emissions.For air pollutants, the differences between the WEM and WAM projections are small. The most significant changes are the partial replacement of coal by renewable energy sources and the declining fuel consumption of road transport as a result of more efficient transport and a modal shift as well as the increasing number of electric and gas vehicles.Under the Programme of Prime Minister Sanna Marin™s Government, a fair transition is a guiding theme in the Government™s climate policy. Emissions reduction measures will be carried out in a way that is fair from a social and regional perspective, and that involves all sectors of society. The Government will establish a ministerial working group on climate and energy issues, which will be in charge of preparing climate policy as a whole. Assessing climate impacts will become a part of the normal process of drafting legislation.Work to combat climate change requires contributions from all sectors of society. The Government will establish a round table on climate policy in connection with the sustainable development committee. By bringing together a variety of operators in society, it can be ensured that climate actions are in the best interests of society and have broad approval from the public.For example, the Government will establish a broad-based peat industry working group to explore how the use of peat can be directed away from energy use and increase its use in innovative, high added value products. The working group will present the means to ensure that the change occurs in a way that is fair at the 171regional and social levels and that does not jeopardise the security of electricity and heat supply in Finland. The aim is to reduce use of peat by at least a half by 2030.5.3 Overview of investment needsi. Existing investment flows and forward investment assumptions with regards to the planned policies and measuresGeneral policies on investments and RDISecuring the necessary funding is the key to meeting energy and climate policy targets. In the context of the European Semester, the Council Recommendation on the 2019 National Reform Programme of Finland and delivering a Council opinion on the 2019 Stability Programme of Finland recommended that Finland take action in 2019 and 2020 to:Focus investment-related economic policy on research and innovation, low carbon and energy transition and sustainable transport, taking into account regional disparities.Under the Programme of Prime Minister Sanna Marin™s Government, Finland will see significant improvements in its research and innovation environment, and a rising level of investments. The Government™s goal is to raise RDI investments to 4 % of GDP and to make Finland the world™s best environment for innovation and experiments.The transition to a low-carbon economy will require additional investments, particularly in bioeconomy, the circular economy, clean energy solutions, energy efficiency, emissions-free forms of energy production, energy storage solutions, carbon recovery and energy utilisation, along with research, development and innovation activities and measures to bring these solutions to market.In industrial sectors, the Government is preparing, in cooperation with industry operators, sector-specific low-carbon roadmaps. The aim is to find technological pathways, which still need RDI investments in order to meet the ambitious 172climate targets. The sector-specific low-carbon roadmaps will be included in the Government™s international growth programme.In the transport sector, the Government™s goal is to reduce transport emissions by at least 50 % compared to the 2005 level by 2030. This is a step towards carbon-free transport. In order to reduce transport emissions, measures will be taken to reduce transport performances, to promote the transition towards more sustainable mobility and to phase out fossil fuels.Investment needs for the ban on coalThe economic impact of premature investment costs in the cities of Helsinki and Vaasa are EUR 34 million. In addition to this, EUR 2Œ4 million needs to be invested in additional equipment in other cities with multi-fuel boilers.Investment generated by the tender process for renewable electricity productionThe Energy Authority has carried out the tendering process and the deadline for tenders was 31 December 2018. It received over 20 tenders for new wind power capacity of which seven were accepted in the rising price order. According to the SKM report, the investment cost for wind power is EUR 1.5 million/MW. Based on this the overall investment cost would be EUR 600Œ750 million.Investment needs for the centralised data exchange solutionThe total cost of the centralised data exchange solution, Datahub, is approximately EUR 36 million, of which the transmission system operator accounts for EUR 19.6 million and the electricity companies EUR 16.6 million. The average investment of electricity companies per customer is EUR 0.5 per year during 10 years. Investments are almost equally distributed between retailers and distribution system operators.173Investment needs for the production of biofuelsAccording to the research study ﬂBiopolttoaineiden kustannustehokkaat toteutuspolut vuoteen 2030ﬂ60, the development of the WAM projection presented in the Energy and Climate Strategy is estimated to amount to a total of 800,000 oil equivalent tonnes (toe) of biofuels in 2030. The amount of bioliquids needed to replace light fuel oil is estimated at 34,000 toe/a in heating and 69,000 toe/a in machinery, i.e. a total of 103,000 toe/a and the remaining 700,000 toe/a in domestic traffic. Biofuels production capacity in Finland is currently more than 500,000 toe, so the additional requirement by 2030 would be around 400,000 toe, if the obligations presented are to be fully met by domestic production.Based on earlier estimates, the cost of investing 400 ktoe in production capacity would be up to EUR 1,300 million by 2030. However, there are significant uncertainties surrounding the estimated amount of biofuel needed. If, for example, energy efficiency did not improve and the number of electric vehicles would be half of the 250,000 vehicles projected for 2030, the required amount of biofuels would be raised annually by about 600 ktoe in the 2030 situation.Investment needs for public recharging points for electric vehiclesFinland´s national plan for the distribution network for alternative transport fuels 61 estimates that in 2030 at least 25,000 public recharging points should be provided for a minimum of 250,000 electric vehicles. This number is based on the Alternative Fuels Infrastructure directive (2014/94/EU), which indicates that the appropriate average number of recharging points should be equivalent to at least one recharging point per 10 cars.If we assume that the average investment cost of one fast charger is approximately EUR 40,000 and the average investment cost of one medium-speed charger is 60 Cost effective pathways of biofuels until 2030 (in Finnish but abstract in English). http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-287-614-061 Distribution network for alternative transport fuels. Finland´s national plan. Ministry of Transport and Communications, Reports 44/2017 http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-243-501-9174approximately EUR 14,000 62, the estimated investments of building the public charging infrastructure are EUR 415 million by 2030. This is based on an assumption that 10 % of public recharging points are fast chargers.There are no similar estimates of the investment needs for the natural gas infrastructure in Finland because no official targets have been set for natural-gas-supplying gas stations by 2030.Investment needs for the main rail infrastructure networkAccording to the Government Programme, the Government will examine the opportunities to finance three large rail network development projects. These projects are the following:Ł Main line and its extensionsŁ Western rail line from Helsinki (including the Espoo urban railway)Ł Eastern rail line from HelsinkiThe investment costs of the Main line and the Western rail line from Helsinki are estimated to be approximately EUR 8.5Œ8.9 billion in the 2020s. However, the negotiations are still ongoing and no actual decisions about these projects have been made.Investment needs for the security of supply of electricity networksThe investments needs for the security of supply of electricity networks are estimated in the report of the electricity transmission pricing and security of supply63.62 The average costs are estimated based on research report of VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland: Tieliikenteen 40 %:n hiilidioksidipäästöjen vähentäminen vuoteen 2030: Käyttövoimavaihtoehdot ja niiden kansantaloudelliset vaikutukset (in Finnish). http://www.doria.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/162111/Tieliikenteen%2040%20hiilidioksidip%C3%A4%C3%A4st%C3%B6jen%20v%C3%A4hent%C3%A4minen%20vuoteen%202030%20K%C3%A4ytt%C3%B6voimavaihtoehdot%20ja%20niiden%20kansantaloudelliset%20vaikutukset%20(VTT%20Oy).pdf63 Jarmo Partanen. Electricity transmission pricing and security of supply. Publications of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment 43 Œ 2018. http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-327-356-6175Based on the report, under the Electricity Market Act, distribution companies must develop their grids and operations so that after 2028 a single disruption may not last more than 6 hours in areas covered by local detailed plans and 36 hours in other areas.Since the 2017 legislative amendments, the Energy Authority has been able to grant companies and extension until 2036 at the most where there are very serious grounds. Total investments by distribution companies amounted to EUR 9.5 billion in 2016Œ2018, of which about EUR 3 billion is related to security of supply requirements.The investments significantly exceed the required amount of straight-line deprecations under the Energy Authority control scheme, resulting in considerable needs for equity capital or non-equity capital. The domestic content of the security of supply investments is 70Œ90 %. The effect of significant and accelerated investments on distribution companies™ revenues is estimated at +10Œ40 % in 2018Œ2028, depending on regional circumstances.Investment needs in electricity interconnector capacityThe estimated costs of the construction of an alternating current connection of 800 MW between northern Finland and northern Sweden are just under EUR 200 million. The transmission line is planned from Messaure in Sweden via Keminmaa to Pyhänselkä in Finland, spanning a distance of around 370 kilometres. 64ii. Sector or market risk factors or barriers in the national or regional contextNo significant sector or market risk factors are recognised.iii. Analysis of additional public finance support or resources to fill identified gaps identified under point (ii)64 Fingrid Oyj, Press Release 16.12.2016. https://www.fingrid.fi/1765.4 Impacts of planned policies and measures described in section 3 on other Member States and regional cooperation at least until the last year of the period covered by the plan, including comparison to projections with existing policies and measuresi. Impacts on the energy system in neighbouring and other Member States in the region to the extent possibleThe ban on the use of coal in energy production and the new premium system for 1.4 TWh renewable electricity will have marginal impacts on the Nordic power system. By 2030, CHP generation capacity is expected to decrease by 300 MW compared to market-based development. This will decrease marginally the flexibility of the Nordic power system. The inertia of the power system will decrease marginally when conventional power plants are shut down and variable renewable energy production increases.ii. Impacts on energy prices, utilities and energy market integrationThe impact of Finnish subsidised renewable electricity generation on neighbouring countries, energy market integration and electricity prices has been examined in SKM Market Predictor™s study29.On an annual basis, Finland is a net importer of electricity and is expected to remain a net importer at least until the mid-2020s, despite an increase in domestic production capacity. Consequently, subsidised renewable energy production primarily reduces the need for imports from neighbouring countries. According to SKM Market Predictor™s analysis, the increase in renewable energy output of 1.4 TWh to be built as a result of a tendering process, will reduce electricity imports from Sweden by about 0.9 TWh annually, which is equivalent to about one-twentieth of Sweden™s estimated total exports at the beginning of the 2020s. Similarly, imports from Russia would contract by about 0.2 TWh on an annual basis, whereas exports to Estonia would increase by about 0.2 TWh.SKM Market Predictor estimates that the increase of 1.4 TWh in renewable electricity generation will lead to a reduction in the Nordic-Baltic system price 177of about EUR 0.25 per MWh at the beginning of the 2020s. As Nordic renewable electricity production continues to grow at the same time, the price effect of Finnish subsidised production will be smaller later on. In conclusion, SKM Market Predictor notes that the impact of Finnish subsidised renewable electricity generation on neighbouring countries, electricity prices and the integration of energy markets is small.The ban on the use of coal by 2029 will have a marginal impact on power prices, depending on the fuel price scenarios an increase of EUR 0.1Œ0.3 per MWh can be expected.Finland, Sweden and Norway all have ambitious goals to reduce emissions in the transport sector. A quota obligation of biofuel in the transport sector has an important role in the beginning. This will create a joint Nordic market for biofuels in transport.iii. Where relevant, impacts on regional cooperationThe renewable energy target in transport sector increases the activities of private companies and research institutes especially in biofuels and electric vehicles. This offers an excellent opportunity for regional cooperation in the dimension of research, innovation and competitiveness.In the dimension of internal energy markets, the quota obligation of biofuels is expected to foster a joint Nordic biofuel market.