3.4 Dimension internal energy market3.4.1 Electricity infrastructurei. Policies and measures to achieve the targeted level of interconnectivity as set out in point (d) of Article 4The National Energy and Climate Strategy outlines that well-functioning regional and European electricity markets and sufficiently strong cross-border connections are the most efficient and cost-effective ways of guaranteeing competitive electricity prices and security of supply. The Electricity Market Act (Sähkömarkkinalaki 588/2013) requires the transmission system operator Fingrid 118to improve its grid according to the reasonable needs of its users and also requires Fingrid to develop the transmission grid in a way that Finland remains as one bidding zone.ii. Regional cooperation in this areaNordic transmission system operators work in close cooperation to develop the electricity infrastructure. They publish a common Nordic Grid Development Plan every other year. The latest joint plan was launched in August 201942. Also, the ministries in the Nordic countries cooperate in the electricity market field through the Electricity Market Group operating under the Nordic Council of Ministers and the national regulatory authorities through NordREG43. Cooperation between the Nordic countries in the electricity market has been intensified by establishing a cooperation forum, Nordic Electricity Market Forum11 for the ministries, regulatory authorities, transmission system operators and market participants.iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union fundsThe transmission system operator Fingrid has announced it will apply for CEF funding for the new cross-border connection between Finland and Sweden on the Project of Common Interest list. Fingrid and Svenska Kraftnät will finance the rest of the investment. The Finnish Government fully supports this project.3.4.2 Energy transmission infrastructurei. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.4.2, including, where applicable, specific measures to enable the delivery of Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) and other key infrastructure projectsThe Electricity Market Act (Sähkömarkkinalaki 588/2013) requires the transmission system operator Fingrid to improve its grid according to the reasonable needs of its 42 Nordic Grid Development Plan 2019, https://www.fingrid.fi/en/pages/news/news/2019/nordic-grid-development-plan-2019/43 NordREG, http://www.nordicenergyregulators.org/119users. The investments made in the projects described in Chapter 2.4.2 are based on this obligation.The Natural Gas Market Act (maakaasumarkkinalaki 587/2017) imposes an obligation on natural gas system operators to develop the network. The system operator must maintain, use and develop its natural gas network and connections to other networks in accordance with customers™ reasonable needs and for its part secure the supply of natural gas to customers. The transmission system operator must also build sufficient cross-border transmission capacity for the integration of the European transmission system if building it is required from the financial point of view to satisfy reasonable and technically feasible demand for natural gas and to pay attention to the security of supply of natural gas.The Finnish Government has established a separate company, Baltic Connector Oy, to head the construction of the Balticconnector gas pipe connection between Finland and Estonia. The unbundled Gas Transmission System Operator (Gasgrid Finland), which will start operations on 1 January 2020, will operate the Balticconnector pipeline as part of the Finnish transmission system.ii. Regional cooperation in this areaRegional cooperation in the electricity market has been described above in Chapter 3.4.1.In 2015, the ministries, the national regulatory authorities and the gas transmission system operators in Finland and the three Baltic states established a regional group for the coordination of the regional gas market and will work in close cooperation within this coordination group to create a regional gas market from the beginning of 2020.iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union fundsThe Balticconnector gas pipeline project on the Project of Common Interest list received EUR 187.5 million through the EU™s CEF funding instrument. Finnish Baltic Connector Oy and Estonian Elering As will finance remaining costs of the project.1203.4.3 Market integrationi. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.4.3The regional electricity market formed by the Nordic and the Baltic states is promoted through cooperation of the ministries, regulatory authorities, transmission system operators and market participants.Nordic cooperation has been further strengthened by the Nordic Council of Ministers™ decision to establish a Nordic Electricity Market Forum. The first Nordic Electricity Market Forum was held in Stockholm in November 2018 and resulted in a new and ambitious vision for the Nordic electricity market44. The vision states thatIn 2030, the Nordics should have the world™s most competitive, innovative and consumer-oriented electricity market, that contributes to reaching the Nordic climate goals.In the first forum, the participants agreed that there are grounds for annual Nordic Electricity Market Forums as a venue for:Ł Communication, collaboration and creating synergies among the di˜erent types of electricity market stakeholders (e.g., producers, consumers, TSOs, regulators, etc.)Ł Interactions between electricity market policymakers and non-policy stakeholdersŁ Input on joint Nordic standpoints on electricity market issues, e.g. in relation to new EU regulations on electricity marketsŁ Discussions on forward-looking themes, such as visions and long-term strategies speci˚c to the Nordic electricity market, as well as preparation of relevant action plans44 2030 Vision for the Nordic Electricity Market https://nordicelforum.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Vision-for-the-nordic-electricity-market-EN_2.pdf121This work was further strengthened by the Nordic Prime Ministers Declaration on Nordic Carbon Neutrality45, adopted in January 2019. The vision was also further discussed and endorsed by the Nordic Energy Ministerial meeting in June 2019.The 2019 Nordic Electricity Market Forum continued to address the vision and the action points formulated in the roadmap46. Different stakeholders presented news and priorities for the electricity market Œ giving an overview of status quo in the Nordic region. The forum is also a place for discussion Œ and together participants can contribute to setting the scene and making the Nordic countries achieve the 2030 electricity market vision.Construction of the Balticconnector gas pipeline between Finland and Estonia will enable the opening and renewal of the gas market. When this investment is completed, the derogation from the Internal Market in Article 49(1) of the Natural Gas Directive will be dropped and the gas market will be fully open for competition from the beginning of 2020. In the new Natural Gas Market Act (maakaasumarkkinalaki 587/2017)47, price regulation of piped gas will be dropped and gas marketplaces and internal market rules will be introduced. On 1 January 2020, Finland will join a common regional gas market area with Estonia and Latvia (FINESTLAT-gas market area). Finland also aims at joining a regional entry-exit system with Estonia and Latvia from 1 January 2022. The final objective is to create a regional gas market comprising Finland and the three Baltic states including Lithuania. The creation of the regional gas market is being prepared between the ministries, the national regulatory authorities and the gas network operators in Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.ii. Measures to increase the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production such as smart grids, aggregation, demand response, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, real-time price signals, 45 https://www.ym.fi/download/noname/%7B5CF4258D-8264-4F5C-8527-081CCBBF2AE2%7D/14342546 ROADMAP FOR REACHING THE NORDIC ELECTRICITY MARKET VISION https://nordicelforum.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Handlingsplan-for-at-opn%C3%A5-2030-visionen-FINAL.pdf47 http://www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/ajantasa/2017/20170587122including the roll-out of intraday market coupling and cross-border balancing marketsIncreasing the level of flexibility is part of the regional cooperation described above. As regards the electricity markets, the countries already have a single day-ahead market and an intraday market48. On 9 March 2018, five Nordic transmission system operators concluded a cooperation agreement on the development of a new Nordic balance service model49.See also sub-point v below.iii. Where applicable, measures to ensure the non-discriminatory participation of renewable energy, demand response and storage, including via aggregation, in all energy marketsiv. Policies and measures to protect consumers, especially vulnerable and, where applicable, energy poor consumers, and to improve the competitiveness and contestability of the retail energy marketThe requirements related to consumer protection have been included in the Electricity Market Act (sähkömarkkinalaki 588/2013) currently in force37. On 1 February 2019, an amendment came into force regarding a centralised information exchange database called Datahub, which will provide each party in the electricity market with all relevant information on electricity trading. Datahub will enable even more efficient and consistent transfer of data, which will be essential in the future electricity retail market. This kind of common platform is also vital to developing other opportunities, such as services for enabling significantly better demand flexibility even at an individual consumer level. The project has already started and is expected to be completed in 2022.To improve the competitiveness of the retail market, the Energy Authority publishes on its website an independent electricity price service, www.sahkonhinta.fi, in 48 www.fingrid.fi/en/pages/news/news/2018/nord-pool-restructures-for-the-future/49 www.fingrid.fi/sivut/ajankohtaista/tiedotteet/2018/pohjoismaisen-tasehallintasopimus-julki-ja-tasehallintarakenne-ehdotus-toimitettu-energiavirastolle/#123which electricity consumers can compare the electricity offers of different suppliers. The service is free of charge and available to all electricity users and suppliers.v. Description of measures to enable and develop demand response including those addressing tariffs to support dynamic pricingIn terms of the adequacy of electric power, it is also important that the prerequisites for combined power and heat generation remain part of an energy-efficient and low-emission energy system with a high degree of security of supply.In October 2018, the Smart Grid Working Group set up by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment proposed an extensive operational programme to increase the demand-side response of electricity and the opportunities for customers to participate. The working group™s key proposals 50 were:Ł Clarifying the roles of actors in the market-based implementation of demand-side response (e.g. principles for the storage of electricity, discontinuation of the ˙exibility implemented by distribution networks)Ł Improving the operating prerequisites for di˜erent energy communities and aggregation modelsŁ De˚ning the functionalities of next-generation smart metersŁ Enabling ˙exibility in the operation of grid companiesŁ Enabling joint invoicing for all suppliersThe Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment is currently implementing these proposals in parallel with the Clean Energy Package implementation. Implementation is well under way in Finland. Many elements of the flexibility requirements, such as fully deregulated retail markets, balancing responsibility, customers™ ability to choose dynamic tariffs, 100 % roll-out of smart meters, etc., already exist in Finnish electricity market legislation.The objective set in the Government™s Energy and Climate Strategy is to create a regional gas market for Finland and the Baltic states. The ministries, the national 50 http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-327-346-7124regulatory authorities and the gas transmission system operators in Finland and the Baltic states work in close cooperation within the group for the coordination of the gas market to create a regional gas market from the beginning of 2020. Finland™s aim is to join the regional gas market step by step. In the first stage, the aim is to join the regional agreement between the transmission system operators on the removal of capacity payments at interconnection points, harmonisation of feed-in charges and the compensation mechanism for transmission charges. In the second stage, the aim is to form a regional balance area.3.4.4 Energy povertyi. Where applicable, policies and measures to achieve the objectives set out in point 2.4.4Finland does not have national indicative objectives to reduce energy poverty as indicated already in Chapter 2.4.4. Prevention of energy poverty is part of general social policy. Chapter 2.4.4 discusses non-energy specific measures to mitigate energy poverty.The Ministry of the Environment has conducted two studies on energy poverty in Finland28, 29, Problems relating to energy poverty are mainly targeted in Finland through social aid schemes to guarantee sufficient indoor temperatures and a supply of electricity for households. In addition, the Social Insurance Institution of Finland (Kela) provides security deposits to energy companies. If an energy company requires a deposit from its customer, the customer may apply for the security deposit from Kela in connection with social support. This ﬁelectricity security depositﬂ relieves the energy poverty concerns of people in the most vulnerable situations.Energy advisory services and support for energy efficiency improvements are used to reduce household energy costs. Changes in consumption habits may reduce energy costs by 5Œ35 %. Motiva Ltd, a sustainable development company owned by the State of Finland, provides energy advice for consumers related to living, building and renovation, heating options and mobility.National electricity and gas market regulations include detailed restrictions applying to the rights of energy companies to disconnect supplies in case of unpaid 125bills. For example, under the Electricity Market Act (588/2013), the electricity supply to an electrically-heated building cannot be disconnected between the beginning of October and end of April until four months have passed since the date of non-payment