4.6. Current French data on R&D in the energy sphere and outlook  4.6.1. Current public funding of R&D in the energy sphere  According to an annual study by the Ministry of Ecological and Inclusive Transition (MTES), energy R&D million, of which:       ls excluding carbon capture, usage and storage (CCUS) (< 2%).   New energy technologies include: energy efficiency (in industry, tertiary, housing and transport), renewable energies (solar, wind, marine, bioenergies, geothermal and hydroelectricity), CO2 capture, storage and utilisation, energy storage, electricity grids and hydrogen and fuel cells, and fundamental science.   The trend over recent years has been to increase the funding of public research in the area of new energy technologies. However, the amounts allocated for innovation for fossil fuels have been drastically reduced, in line with the national carbon neutrality targets for 2050.    4.6.2. Outlook for R&D support in the energy sphere  France is committed to a major process of ensuring the long-term transformation of the economy, which must be more circular, carbon-free and sustainable. Research and innovation are essential components of this process, and are necessary for the development of solutions that are virtuous, competitive and socially acceptable. Thus, research and innovation will remain the cornerstones of national policies on energy transition in the coming years in order to achieve the targets set for 2030.  As stated in Chapter 3.5.3., the three first components of the Investments for the Future Programme (PIA) have enabled very substantial support for innovation for the development of new carbon-free ecological transition, in addition to horizontal tools, driven in particular by the CDC and BPI France, has made it possible to develop projects that are crucial for achieving our targets.   For the future, dialogue has been initiated on the configuration of support tools to follow on from the current PIA instruments. This support, which is expected to be increased, will need to enable the development of technologies that permit large-scale industrial application of carbon-free solutions so that the environmental and climate targets set can be achieved quickly, while providing a competitive advantage for French industry in emerging markets.  At the same time, the law on multiannual research planning is currently being readied for debate in Parliament, which is planned for 2020.   This law addresses three major challenges:    307     increasing the funding capacity for research projects, programmes and laboratories;    consolidating and reinforcing the attractiveness of scientific jobs and careers;    consolidating partner-oriented research and the French model for innovation.  To achieve this, the multiannual legislative framework will make it possible to:   consider the intrinsically lengthy research period and restore time and visibility for laboratories;   provide a consistent, sustainable framework for the reforms undertaken to leverage the effects of public investment in research;   prepare a framework that is perfectly aligned with the Horizon Europe programme scheduled to commence in 2021;        