 128    3.3. Energy supply security  Supply security can be defined as the capacity of the energy system to meet foreseeable market demand continuously at a reasonable cost by balancing supply and demand.  3.3.1. Supply security of liquid fuels  Measures:   Launch studies to obtain a forward-looking vision of the necessary network of depots for oil storage and the minimum number required to guarantee supply security.   Monitor the number and location of petrol stations to determine the quality of service for all fuel consumers.   Examine the appropriateness of introducing tools to guarantee the continuity of service in oil logistics in order to ensure that the essential needs of the country are met.    3.3.2. Supply security of gas products  Measures:   Maintain the current criterion for supply security.   Convert the low-calorific-value gas system as soon as possible, and by 2029 at the latest.   Keep the 11 sites currently operational until at least 2023 (volume of 138.5 TWh and extraction capacity of 2,376 GWh/day).   Do not develop new storage sites within the scope of the regulation.   In 2023, confirm the assessment of the storage capacity necessary for post-2026 supply security and, in the next MEP, identify the underground natural gas storage facilities that would no longer be necessary to ensure the security of natural gas supply. By 2026, the list of the essential storage facilities could be reduced by an extraction capacity of at least 140 GWh/day (6%).   Develop the interruptibility of natural gas consumption by at least 200 GWh/day by 2023.   Clarify the legislative and regulatory framework for natural gas consumption load shedding.    3.3.3. Security of electricity supply  The measures introduced by the MEP make it possible to clarify the definition of supply security criteria, while awaiting the future discussions to take place at European level on a possible harmonisation of supply security criteria.   Defer the prospect of increasing the nuclear share in the electricity generation mix to 50% until 2035.   Confirm the current supply security criterion and clarify its content by specifying that:  o -contractual resources and that the duration of the disruption must not exceed three hours per year on average;  o in these disruptions, the expectation of cuts in supply to end consumers, due to supplydemand imbalances, must not exceed two hours per year.   Continue the work to ensure more comprehensive consideration in these criteria of the number of customers cut and not merely the duration of the cut.   129     Contribute to harmonising the procedures for establishing the criteria used by the Member States to define their objectives for electricity supply security.   Accelerate the decrease in peak electricity consumption:  o by encouraging heating methods that do not contribute (or contribute less) to this; o by developing flexibility of demand.    ess the potential need for reforms.   Consolidate the European integration of the capacity mechanism via cooperation agreements between RTE and border grid operators and on the basis of the new European regulations on capacity mechanisms introduced through adoption of the 4th package.  Increase cooperation among gas and electricity transmission system operators on the risks for the electrical system during periods of tension in the gas system, and put in place procedures to manage these common fault modes