3.4. Internal energy market  3.4.1. Electricity infrastructure  Measures:   Continue the development of interconnectors on the basis of positive cost-benefit analyses.   Optimise and reinforce the electricity transmission system in order to exploit interconnectors as much as possible.   Continue regional cooperation for the development of interconnectors within the High Level Group with Spain and Portugal.   Continue active regional cooperation in the area of supply security, particularly through participation in the Energy Pentalateral Forum and discussions with the Iberian peninsula.   Implement the network code on security and the restoration of the electrical system.   Ensure that power supply security is covered in the coming years (particularly in 20222023) and implement additional measures if necessary to enable the shutting down of coal-based power generation by 2022.   Prepare and implement a dimensioning of electricity networks that make it possible to accommodate new sources of electricity generation planned in the Multiannual Energy Plan.   Conduct studies, with the AIE and RTE, on the technical feasibility of an electrical system with a significant level of variable renewable energies.   Refine the economic assessment of smart grid solutions on the basis of recipients (system operators, producers, consumers), in order to target Government support in the most effective way.   Make the best use of the potential of services provided by smart meters, in particular by providing more information about their functionalities.   130      Measures concerning curtailment:   Promote the use of such flexibilities, particularly in industry and tertiary sectors.   Change the rules for estimating curtailments, to increase reliability in the sector, in particular the methods used to monitor curtailments.   Improve and simplify the support framework for curtailments to best meet the needs of the sector, in accordance with EU law on State aid.   With ENEDIS and ADEeF, increase the options for use of demand modulation to manage local problems with the operation of distribution systems.   Encourage suppliers to develop deals promoting flexibility, by taking advantage of the new potential offered by smart meters.  Measures concerning electricity storage:   During the first period of the MEP, launch the procedures for the development of pumpedenergy transfer stations (STEP) for a potential of 1.5 GW identified with a view to commissioning the installations between 2030 and 2035.   During the first MEP period, set up the framework for rolling out the development of virtual lines using battery storage facilities, to avoid grid reinforcements and the capping of renewable energies, by 2028.   Continue upstream R&D or demonstration efforts (e.g. a programme of future investments for demonstrators, a single interministerial fund for collaborative research projects, ANR support for research and development projects, innovation competition for small businesses, but also demonstrators of grid services such as the Ringo project led by RTE) in order to develop competitive electricity storage solutions, which, in the medium term, could allow the share of renewable energy in the electric mix to continue increasing.   In conjunction with committees within the sector, explore the possibilities for developing a French production sector for batteries and provide an ambitious plan, incorporating all storage parameters, by mid-2019.   Given the existing possibilities, study the potential of reusing saline cavities for the storage of hydrogen.  Measures concerning self-consumption:   A total of 200,000 photovoltaic generation sites for self-consumption in 2023, including 50 collective self-consumption operations.   The development of self-consumption in particular involves a need for visibility for the players about the context applying to them, and about the various factors that could have an influence on the level of profitability of self-consumption operations:   open new possibilities for collective self-consumption and facilitate their funding;   establish the legal and regulatory framework applicable to renewable energy communities and citizen energy communities.    3.4.2. Energy poverty  Measures:   131     Evaluation and monitoring of fuel poverty in France: the National Observatory for Fuel Poverty (Observatoire National de la Précarité Energétique, ONPE) has become a reliable, shared reference tool for addressing energy poverty in France, for understanding, monitoring  and analysing this phenomenon, along with the mechanisms put in place to prevent energy poverty. A group of indicators has therefore been defined to characterise and quantify the fuel poverty linked to housing and mobility, and the changes in the indicators are monitored each year and published as part of a trend chart. Two indicators can therefore be used to evaluate fuel poverty:   CommissionerGeneral for Sustainable Development using the Prometheus micro-simulation model; this indicator considers a household to be in a situation of fuel poverty where its expenditure on energy in the home exceeds 8% of revenue, where revenue by consumption unit (CU) is below the third decile of revenue per CU;  -info barometer produced by the National Energy Ombudsman using a sample of 1,500 people. This declarative indicator makes it possible to quantify self-restriction phenomena not captured by the economic indicator. This indicator considers a household to be in a situation of fuel poverty if it declares that it feels cold because of at least one of the following five reasons: poor insulation, insufficient heating, heating breakdown, heating restriction because of cost or energy shutdown because of non-payment.  Thus, according to the 2019 trend chart developed by the ONPE, 11.6% of French people (thus 3.3 million households representing 6.7 million individuals) spend more than 8% of their revenue on paying their home energy bills, and 15% of French people declared that they experienced cold during the winter of 2017.   Regular monitoring of these fuel poverty indicators, along with analysis of the impacts of the various mechanisms put in place to address this phenomenon, make it possible for France to steer its actions aimed at reducing fuel poverty.      A varied group of measures is deployed to prevent fuel poverty:  for eligible households in 2018. The eligibility criteria for energy allowances have been widened, so as to benefit the 20% of households with the lowest incomes. This will extend the allocation of energy allowances to 2.2 million additional households, or 5.8 million households in total.    effective through:   a new fixed-rate scale in 2020, which will take into account the energy efficiency of actions;  when the renovation work is performed; The grant rate will be increased for low-income households, so that public support really triggers the actions needed to escape fuel poverty.  -lessors in 2021, and the simplification of the request process for multiunit collective renovation projects.  -rate eco-loan), which can now apply, using a flat-rate grant, to single-action projects (e.g. installation of a central heating system powered by renewable energy without requiring a series of work projects).  households that are thermal sieve owners (diagnosed as performance F or G).    132    novative solutions allowing the industrial application of renovation solutions by taking advantage of effects of scale.  -income households by increasing the old vehicle replacement target from 500,000 to 1,000,000 over the five-year period, with  a doubled bonus for very low-income households (as well as tax-free long-distance vehicles), while working on attractive loans to finance the balance to be paid.  ar sharing and more generally the alternatives to individual car use across France when this is possible, targeting the most vulnerable communities.  Mobilise white certificates for the benefit of low-income households, both to reduce consumption by buildings (reinforcement and extension of the energy saving boost) and for mobility (support for carpooling, the development of bike use instead of thermal vehicles, handling the mobility needs of households in situations of fuel poverty)