3.2. Energy efficiency  3.2.1. National energy efficiency obligation scheme and alternative policy measures in accordance with Articles 7-bis and 7-ter of Directive 2012/27/EU, to be prepared in accordance with Annex II  In accordance with Article 7(1) of Directive 2012/27/EU, France will use the White Certificates (WC) mechanism to fulfil its energy efficiency obligation for the period from 1 January 2021 to 31 December 2030.   3.2.1.1. Description of the energy efficiency obligation scheme  The White Certificates (WC) mechanism, created in 2005 and governed by Articles L. 221-1 et seq. of the Energy Code, is a key tool in French policy relating to the management of energy demand.  WCs (1 WC = 1 kWh cumac17 final energy) are awarded by the Ministry of Energy to eligible stakeholders (obligated entities but also other non-obligated legal persons, such as local authorities, housing associations, etc.) that have undertaken energy-saving operations in line with certain criteria set by decree. These WCs can be freely exchanged.   17 The ternumber of kWh cumac saved following the installation of an energy efficient appliance corresponds to the cumulative total of the energy saved each year durin  117    There are two methods for obtaining WCs: standardised operations and specific operations.  Fact sheets on standardised operations, defined by decree, are prepared for the most common operations, to facilitate implementation of energy saving actions. These are classified by sector (residential, tertiary, industrial, agricultural, transport, networks) and set out the lump-sum energy saving amounts in kWh updated regularly. The list of standardised operation fact sheets is available online.  These standardised operation fact sheets are developed by groups of thematic experts, coordinated by the Technical Association for Energy and the Environment (ATEE) and bringing together the various stakeholders. The fact sheets are then appraised by ADEME, and validated by the Ministry of Energy.  The specific operations make it possible to recognise energy savings achieved in non-standardised operations. These correspond to infrequent operations that cannot be standardised, in particular as  The applicant must follow six steps for a specific operation:     carry out an energy audit;   establish the situation before the operation;   determine the baseline situation and justify the choice made;   determine the projected situation after the operation, including theoretical before-and-after energy balance sheets;   justify the amount of certificates requested and in particular the choice of the equipment life cycle;   justify the calculation of the timeline for return on investment (TRI).  ADEME and the National White Certificates Office ensure that the energy savings requested are valid and accurate.  The White Certificates mechanism is described in detail in the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (PNAEE) sent to the European Commission in 201718.   3.2.1.2. Expected cumulative and annual volume of savings and duration of the obligation period(s)  The first three periods have been marked by a significant ramping-up of the targets: 54 TWhc for 2006 2009 and then 447 TWhc for 20112014 and lastly 850 TWhc for 20152017, including 150 for households experiencing fuel poverty (this new obligation was introduced from 1 January 2016 by the Law on Energy Transition for Green Growth. The mechanism is currently in its fourth period. The Decree of 9 December 2019 amending the provisions of the regulatory section of the Energy Code relating to White Certificates extended the current period of one year (now 20182021) and increased the WC target for the fourth period to 2,133 TWh cumac, including 533 TWh for households experiencing fuel poverty.   18 Website: https://www.ecologique-solidaire.gouv.fr/sites/default/files/PNAEE%202017.pdf   118    The cumulative volume of energy savings expected by the WC mechanism for the 20212030 period will be at least equal to the volume of the energy savings obligation as stated in Section 2.2.2 of this report for the 20212030 period under Article 7 of Directive 2012/27/EU. The periods covered by the obligations will have a term of three to four years.  3.2.1.3. Obligated parties and their responsibilities  The WC mechanism is based on a three-year obligation imposed by the public powers on energy sellers thresholds set by the regulatory provisions.  When requesting certificates, obligated sellers must show that they have played an active and encouraging role. To prove this, they must be able to produce the following, if checks are required:      evidence that the contribution is direct and was made before the operation started;   a sworn declaration signed by the beneficiary of the energy efficient operation stating    At the end of the obligation period, obligated energy sellers must prove that they have fulfilled their obligations, demonstrating that they hold certificates in an amount equivalent to those obligations. If they fail to do so, a deterrent penalty must be paid.  3.2.1.4. Target sectors  The aim of the WC mechanism is to mobilise potential energy savings, in particular in sectors where these are the most widespread. The WC mechanism therefore concerns all sectors: residential, tertiary, industry, transport and agriculture.  3.2.1.5. Eligible actions provided for under the measure  In accordance with Section 2 of Chapter I of Title II of Book II of the Energy Code, the awarding of WCs complies with two broad principles in order to ensure that the mechanism does indeed represent an additional tool:   White certificates may only be issued for actions that go further than the rules in force at the beginning of the period.   The baseline situation for calculation of the lump-sum energy savings corresponds to the technical and economic state of the market for the product or service on the most recent date for which data are available, integrating the effect of regulatory changes (in particular EU regulations on the ecodesign of energy-related products). In the case of work to improve the heat performance of the outer walls of an existing building or its in-built heating system, the baseline situation for energy performance takes into account the general state of buildings of the same type and the level of performance of the material or equipment used on the most recent date for which data are available.  When a person undertakes action under a specific operation aimed at saving energy, that action may only be taken into account for the issuing of white certificates if the savings made take longer than a minimum period of return (three years) to offset the cost of the investment.     119      3.2.1.6. Alternative policy measures in accordance with Articles 7-bis and 7-ter of Directive 2012/27/EU  At this stage, France is not planning to use alternative policy measures as permitted by Articles 7-bis and 7-ter of Directive 2012/27/EU for the 20212030 period.    3.2.2. Decrease in final energy consumption  General approach  Cross-sector measures to reduce final energy consumption:   Set the target in 2020 for the next five years of the White Certificates (WC) mechanism on the basis of an analysis of potential energy savings.   Support an ambitious, effective European policy on the ecodesign of energy-related products, and energy labelling of these products.   Promote a European floor price for carbon, the setting of a carbon price for all sectors outside the European carbon allowance system, which is a single price at the borders of the European Union (carbon inclusion mechanism), compatible with the rules of the World Trade Organisation, intended to prevent carbon leakage effectively.   Supplementary measures must be put in place, relying in particular on the activities of the new governance bodies introduced in 2019 to obtain similar effects to the carbon component.    The measures have been adopted on the basis of the estimates used in the baseline scenario. If the economic situation develops differently, with those measures unchanged, total final energy consumption could increase up to 24 TWh in 2028, thus an increase of 1.7% in consumption (compared to the baseline scenario). The Government will monitor changes in consumption and will assess whether the expected targets are being met. It will supplement the measures in place as required with additional policy measures in order to achieve the target set.    3.2.2.1. Building sector: residential and tertiary  Measures to reduce energy consumption in buildings:   Implementation of the Building Energy Renovation Plan.   Undertake actions to eradicate inefficient homes (energy sieves) (diagnosed as having F or G performance) in three phases (Law No 2019-1147 of 8 November 2019 on energy and climate):  o A first incentive phase in anticipation of a mandatory energy audit prior to the sale or lease of an inefficient home beginning in 2022. This audit will contain renovation proposals and estimated costs, and will inform the prospective buyer or lessee of future energy costs.  o A second phase will take effect before 2028 requiring owners of inefficient homes to  o A third phase will be implemented in 2028 to fine property owners if they do not comply with the obligations to renovate inefficient homes.  For public buildings:   Set up a task force aimed at accelerating the renovation of school buildings. Educational buildings (school, middle school, high school) represent around 50% of the building stock of local authorities. Public action on this segment of the stock also involves raising awareness of the energy savings implications for new generations.   120     As part of the 2018available to local authorities for the energy renovation of their buildings:  o  o Caisse des Dépôts in large capital projects or to support innovative economic models;  o   Starting from 1 January 2020, forbid the purchase or heavy repair of fuel oil boilers in Government buildings, and plan the end of all fuel oil use in Government buildings (excluding operational issues) by 2029.   Release as open data the list and/or map of buildings belonging to the Government, including specifications of floor area and type of energy used for heating. All willing public bodies (local authorities, hospitals, etc.) could also be invited to join in this measure.    Implement a building renovation plan for 39 administrative units in France.  For professionals:   Work with building and real estate professionals, NGOs, local authorities and energy companies, under the FAIRE banner, to better identify the relevant renovation solutions for households, to trigger more action by enhancing household knowledge and confidence, and to better coordinate the existing grants and financing.   Finalise and implement the new environmental regulations for buildings, in particular by:  o making a minimum renewable heating rate obligatory;  o incorporating a criterion on greenhouse gas emissions in operation and over the entire life cycle of the building;  o reinforcing standards in terms of energy performance, with the inclusion of stipulations for comfort in the summertime.     The new regulations will result in a suitable updating of the conversion factors for converting electricity into primary energy and the emission coefficient for electricity for heating currently used in regulations governing new buildings (RT2012, Label E+C-, RE2020):  o The conversion factor for converting final energy into primary energy for electricity will be fixed at 2.3, a value calculated by averaging values over 50 years, taking into account the electric mix diversification targets set by law.  o The electricity emission factor will be determined using the monthly usage method, which results in a value of 79 gCO2/kWh for electric heating.   For tertiary buildings, monitor the application of energy efficiency obligations for existing tertiary buildings, which aim to achieve a 40% reduction in their energy consumption by 2030 compared with 2010, focusing on buildings over 1,000 m² in all business sectors.  For private individuals:    through:  o a new fixed-rate scale in 2020, which will take into account the energy efficiency of actions; o payment of the corresponding benefits by the ANAH when the renovation work is performed; the grant rate will be increased for low-income households, so that public support really triggers the actions needed to escape fuel poverty;  o extension of these payments to cover owners-lessors in 2021, and the simplification of the request process for multiunit collective renovation projects.    121     Expand the use of the recently simplified ecoPTZ (zero-rate eco-loan), which can now apply, using a flat-rate grant, to single-action projects (e.g. installation of a central heating system powered by renewable energy without requiring a series of work projects).   Keep the VAT rate at 5.5% for energy renovation work eligible for the CITE and related works.   Provide more information for households about the energy performance of their homes and the SARE programme (service to support energy-efficiency works), the provision of advice and home diagnosis in particular for low-having F or G performance), and support comprehensive renovations of dwellings (Habiter Mieux Sérénité programme).     Box 3: Building Energy Renovation Plan  The Building Energy Renovation Plan makes energy renovation a national public priority. In particular, it authorises or provides for the following:   -income households each year;   simplification of the incentives for all French people, making the tax credit a lump-sum payment and adapting the existing zero-rate eco-loan;   increased reliability of energy labels for homes and energy efficiency diagnosis, to increase confidence;   better training for professionals and better monitoring of the quality of works, with a review of the RGE label (French environmental sustainability label);   promotion of a large-scale renovation programme in public buildings managed by the Government      3.2.2.2. Transport sector  Principal measures to supplement cross-sector measures:   Maintain the conversion bonus to continue the replacement of a large number of old vehicles with new or used vehicles with much lower emissions: the bonus is doubled in 2019 for lower income households and working people under the taxation ceiling who have long journeys to and from work, and it is higher to make conversion to a rechargeable hybrid or electric vehicle more attractive. The objective is to reach one million people by 2022.   Meet the European target for greenhouse gas emissions of 95 gCO2/km on average for cars by 2021.   Achieve, as efficiently as possible, the European target for 2030: a drop of at least 37.5% in CO2 emissions for private vehicles sold (compared to 2021).    End sales of new private and light commercial vehicles powered by fossil fuels by 2040 (LOM).   Remove barriers to the development of electric vehicles: total additional cost of ownership (in particular costs in addition to purchase), usage constraints (battery life, charging infrastructure).   Balance the total cost of ownership: maintain subsidy mechanisms and/or taxes; introduce regulatory measures (development of low-emission zones, usage benefits such as dedicated lanes or parking spaces); support investment in clean heavy-goods vehicles through a strengthened additional depreciation scheme: extend the additional depreciation scheme for NGV heavy-goods vehicles until 2021; reinforce the scheme for heavy-goods vehicles weighing less than 16 tonnes and establish technological neutrality for this measure (extension to hydrogen and electricity); extend it to cover other modes of transport; e.g. maritime.     122     Remove the tax advantage for non-road diesel over three years (excluding agriculture and rail and river transport).   Increase the solidarity tax on airline tickets in order to contribute to the financing of sustainable transport infrastructure.   Promote carpooling and all forms of mobility alternatives to personal cars.   Reinforce the bonus/penalty system to encourage the purchase of less polluting vehicles and promote the sale of electric vehicles. Lower the threshold for penalties by -3 gCO2/km in 2019 and continue to lower it after the new WLTP standard has been passed. Maintain the bonus at a high rate while gradually incorporating technological and in-use gains.    123    Implement regulatory measures or expand the use of existing incentive tools to develop urban spaces planning (development of low-emission zones, usage benefits such as dedicated lanes or parking spaces).   Promote clean mobility for 2/3-wheeled vehicles:    focus on four greening charter initiatives for 2/3-wheeled vehicles and quadricycles:   - build awareness within the sector and among buyers of the environmental issues linked to 2/3-wheeled vehicles and quadricycles;  - increase the supply of low-emission 2/3-wheeled vehicles and quadricycles;  - facilitate the use of low-emission 2/3-wheeled vehicles and quadricycles, as well as the proliferation of electric recharging points;  - combat noise pollution from 2/3-wheeled vehicles and quadricycles;  -wheeled vehicles (energy label, public sector minimum quota for the purchase of low-emission 2/3-wheeled vehicles, etc.).   Deploy a recharging infrastructure network and support the targeted growth of the number of electrical vehicles: mobilise financing tools (PIA, CITE, WC ADVENIR scheme; increased coverage of connection costs by network tariffs); remove the barriers to installation (changes in co-ownership right, terminals on demand); facilitate recharging in companies (reform of benefits in kind in 2019).   Exempt all river navigation (except private pleasure craft) from energy consumption tax (TICPE) in order to promote multimodal mobility. This exemption was previously reserved for the inland transport of goods.   Reduce the final electricity consumption tax (TICFE) rate for boats and ships that use electricity directly when docking. The objective is to make the use of electric recharging stations more competitive with regard to other modes of energy supply (engine and generator) when ships and boats are docked.   Create a carpooling for commuters.   path continuity and user safety, gradually implement markings for bikes and secure parking to combat theft and fencing, promote learning about bikes and a bike culture in schools so younger generations will include this eco-friendly mode of transportation in their way of life.   Develop carpooling: reserved lanes and parking, public carpooling department and calculation of cost sharing between driver and passengers.   Develop a new framework for self-service solutions.     3.2.2.3. Industrial sector  Measures to supplement cross-sector measures:   Trial a managed release of white certificates for energy saving operations carried out in facilities covered by the European CO2 emissions trading system.   Identify new methods to support decarbonisation or energy efficiency actions in industry, within the framework of the 2025 Production Agreement.   Integrate a technical and financial assessment of solar or geothermal heat generation into energy audits on large and medium-sized enterprises.    124     Continue to increase applications for the eco-energy loans (PEE) made available by BPI France, for SMEs and very small enterprises engaged in work that qualifies for white certificates. Extend the PEE scheme until 2025.  Promote the deployment of energy management systems (ISO 50 001 type) and energy benchmarks in industry.    3.2.3. Decrease in primary consumption of fossil fuels  3.2.3.1. Measures complementing the energy control measures to reduce coal consumption  For professionals, a 75% reduction in coal consumption in industrial sectors, excluding steel between now and 2028:   As part of the Heat Fund, prioritise the substitution of biomass instead of coal in industry and adaptations.   For district heating systems, as part of the Heat Fund, prioritise the substitution of renewable make system operators and leaders within the 10 networks that are totally or partially reliant on coal commit to transitioning away from coal in the next five years. This effort is facilitated by the fact that in early 2019 the ADEME Board decided to align the rules of the Heat Fund to those defined within the EU framework on State aid.  In the iron and steel sector:   Continue trials to set up processes that emit less CO2 in blast furnaces through the use of loans from the Investments for the Future Programme.   Over the period covered by the MEP, establish demonstrators of innovative processes that enable the complete replacement of coal.   Continue Heat Fund support for actions to recover industrial residual heat.  In the energy sector:   Shut down the last electric power stations running solely on coal between now and 2022. In accordance with the guidelines prioritising projects that develop biomass in heat form, the Government will not grant any financial support for those focusing on generating electricity using biomass.   The Government will no longer authorise new power stations generating electricity exclusively from coal.  For private individuals, eradication of coal heating by 2028:   Maintain CITE grants for the installation of renewable heating. Renewable heating is heating provided by heat pumps, biomass boilers, hybrid solar systems or by connection to a renewable district heating system.   information.    3.2.3.2. Specific MEP measures to reduce primary oil consumption    125     The Government will no longer authorise new power stations generating electricity exclusively from fuel oil.   Maintain CITE grants for the installation of renewable heating. Renewable heating is heating provided by heat pumps, biomass boilers, hybrid solar systems or by connection to a renewable district heating system.  Plan for abandoning fuel oil by 2028 in public buildings, with a flyer to be published in 2020, over nine years.    3.2.4. Cost of supporting energy control  3.2.4.1. In buildings  Tax credit and reduced VAT  To achieve the MEP goals, two tax benefits are currently available:   CITE tax credit covering up to 30% of the cost of renewable heat generation equipment and work to reduce energy consumption in primary properties completed more than two years ago;   VAT rate reduced to 5.5% for renewable heat generation equipment and work to reduce energy consumption in residential properties completed more than two years ago, as well as inextricably linked ancillary work.  ANAH grants  The National Housing Agency (ANAH) is financing works in particular to improve the energy performance of the private homes of low and very low-income households. The ANAH budget for 2020  Eco-loans for social housing  The main incentive measure for energy renovation in social housing is the social housing eco-loan (ecoPLS), a subsidised-rate loan distributed by the Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations (CDC). A new Government-CDC agreement entered into force in August 2019, drawn up with the Social Housing Union (USH), in order to make the eco-PLS plan more ambitious and attractive while simplifying the application process. In particular, this involves an increase in the loan-per-following progression of eco-PLS taken out over the last three years has been observed:       in 2018:  -energy building status (Bâtiment Basse Consommation, BBC).   billion over five years to the renovation of energy sieves (inefficient homes) in social housing. The   126    Investment Pact (25 April 2019) has set an annual target of 125,000 energy renovations (for one step of at least one DPE label) and an acceleration in the rate of renovation of energy sieves.  Relief on energy-saving works for low-income housing (Habitation à loyer modéré, HLM) and semipublic compani   -saving works, on   127    fund energy-saving works undertaken by social housing owners to renovate their social housing stock. million in 2017.  In 2016, more than 6,000 property owners benefited from this scheme.  It is proposed that the total budget be determined on the basis of the progression of eco-PLS loans (scheme for social housing energy renovations, see above). The result would be an average budget  Heavy building work  upgrading and restoration of Government buildings    -owned Assets: Energy Efficiethat do not comply with heating regulations. It has been evaluated quantitatively so as to renovate 3% of the Government building stock per year over the 20152020 period. When establishing the scenarios, the SNBC applied the following floor areas of renovated public building stock (in Mm2):       2016  2017  2018  2019  2020  Renovated floor areas of Government building stock (Mm2)    1.559  1.514  1.460  1.522  1.563  Renovated floor areas of building stock by 2020 (Mm2)  The renovation of Government buildings involves several budgetary vectors, and in particular part of the property special allocation account and the specific support programmes of the Ministries.  participating in     3.2.4.2. In transport  Contribution to financing the acquisition of clean vehicles  ise of about 50%. These amounts are covered by income from the penalty.   The Climate Plan sets the goal of ending sales of new cars that emit greenhouse gases by 2040.   Contribution for taking polluting vehicles off the road  Programme 792 finances the a The goal is to eliminate one million vehicles by 2022.     