2.5.1. National Energy Research Strategy  Article 183(II) of the LTECV (which was published in 2015 with the aim of ensuring that France can make a more effective contribution to the fight against climate change, to environmental conservation and to the strengthening of energy independence at the same time as allowing its businesses and citizens to access energy at a competitive price) provides for the drafting of a National Energy Research Strategy (SNRE). The aim of this strategy is to identify the R&D challenges and scientific obstacles along the innovation chain in the energy sector that must be overcome and the deadlines by which this must happen so that the targets set by law can be achieved; these challenges and obstacles are also placed in their broader international context.   This strategy was drafted jointly in 2016 by the Directorate-General for Energy and Climate and the Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (both of which operate under the aegis of the Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation), and provides for the setting up of a monitoring committee that gathers together representatives of all energy research stakeholders.   75    The SNRE was approved by a joint decree of the ministers responsible for energy and research, and was published in the Official Journal on 27 December 2016.  Innovation will play a key role in the achievement of the targets set in the Paris Agreement, which was adopted with a view to strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change.   More specifically, the SNRE sets out four main guidelines, each with proposals for measures that can be taken to shape the future.  2.5.1.1. Guideline 1: focusing on key topics for the energy transition  Guideline 1 is intended to stimulate debate on the targets set in relation to diversification of the energy mix, growth in renewable energies, increased energy efficiency across all sectors of industry, reduced use of fossil fuels, etc., and lists the associated scientific and technological challenges (system flexibility with a view to the integration of renewable energies, decentralisation and multi-level governance of energy systems, enhanced role for consumers, continued improvements to nuclear energy in innovative fields (SMR technology) and nuclear competitiveness, the digital transition, safety and shut-downs and adaptation of the cycle to the development trajectory of electronuclear production, etc.)  To this end, the following is proposed:   an increase in the multidisciplinary nature of R&D (link between the energy transition and the digital revolution, environmental challenges and incorporation into the circular economy, economic and social challenges in connection with consumer involvement and support for the decentralisation of systems);   a systematic approach based on comparative analysis of the various flexibility solutions currently being developed (curtailment, production management, storage, coupling of networks and vectors, etc.) with a view to obtaining a detailed overview of short-term, medium-term and long-term technological options for future national programmes. This research will supplement the extensive work currently being carried out on various innovative means of production (e.g. renewable cooling) and demand management (e.g. materials and processes for the energy renovation of buildings).    2.5.1.2. Guideline 2: growing R&D&I capacities in tandem with the regions and the industrial base, particularly SMEs and intermediate-sized enterprises  Guideline 2 centres around the economic challenges involved in maintaining and improving the most competitive mature markets and developing new markets; these challenges should be viewed in a broader global context rather than simply in connection with the needs of the energy transition in France. A cooperative approach between the public and private sectors and an experimental approach are essential prerequisites for accelerating the transfer of technologies from R&D laboratories to the market. Proposals include the following:   boosting support for projects demonstrating new technologies and solutions, particularly in the regions, with the involvement of local authorities and using all available financing tools (State aid or equity);   supporting the development of SMEs and intermediate-sized enterprises, not only through financial backing but also by helping them to gain a foothold in the relevant markets;   providing an organisational framework for individual sectors of French industry by strengthening initiatives already in place at national level, carrying out regular analyses of the positioning of French players on the global stage, and encouraging these players to become involved in European or global  76    during COP21).  2.5.1.3. Guideline 3: developing skills and knowledge for and by R&D&I  Guideline 3 centres around skills development, firstly with a view to building an energy research community and secondly with a view to providing training and informing to the various sectors of the public with an interest in the topic (professionals, civil society, decision-makers). The importance of a multi-disciplinary approach is emphasised heavily, as is the need to build a community of researchers working in energy-related areas of fundamental sciences, including humanities and social sciences. The following measures are therefore proposed:   strengthening international collaboration and helping French entities involved in R&D in the field of energy to play a more prominent role on the global stage;   building thematic networks of researchers as a means of building a critical mass around existing potential of major research infrastructures as a basis for developing energy-related programmes;   expanding modelling and forecasting capacities as a basis for developing scenarios that incorporate the various dimensions of energy systems and make it possible to identify and guide energy mix choices;    developing new training courses for jobs associated with the energy transition;   involving civil society in demonstration projects in the regions and in providing feedback on these projects as a basis for society-level debates and choices and the adoption of the best-performing technologies.   2.5.1.4. Guideline 4: creating a lightweight and high-performing governance that enables dynamic operational steering of the SNRE  The final guideline emphasises the need to coordinate implementation of the SNRE with initiatives already in place at various geographical levels, ranging from local (in particular at regional level) to international (in particular at European level, e.g. the Horizon 2020 Programme and the SET-Plan), and to strengthen governance with a view to guaranteeing efficient implementation beyond the drafting stage. The following are therefore proposed:   convening an annual meeting by a committee of stakeholders to drive forward and monitor the implementation of the SNRE following its adoption, and to engage in preparations for its future revision on the basis of a five-year cycle;   an ex-post evaluation of the SNRE;   organising regular exchanges of views with the regions on R&D support measures, priorities and funding data, with a view to enabling coordinated development of the relevant strategies, harnessing synergies and consolidating feedback received in connection with demonstrations at regional level;   monitoring compliance by France with its undertaking (made under the Mission Innovation initiative launched during COP21) to match R&D funding in the field of green energy;   ensuring that R&D funding mechanisms at national and international level are complementary. For example, France will be able to campaign at EU level for an increase in funding under the Horizon 2020 Programme for upstream research (low TRL) and ensure that the future Innovation Support Fund established under the heading of carbon market reform (ETS Directive) incorporates an additional source of funding and adapted financing instruments for low-carbon innovation in large-scale projects.   77    The SNRE undergoes regular reviews; in particular, a Monitoring Committee is convened each year, with the -related duties being carried out by the ministries responsible for research, innovation and energy, the National Research Agency, the ADEME and the National Alliance for the Coordination of Research Energy (ANCRE).  The stated goal of this Monitoring Committee, which is open to a wide range of national stakeholders in the field of energy, is to prove that the research measures implemented are consistent with the broad guidelines set out in the SNRE. If necessary, the Monitoring Committee can suggest any amendments that might need to be made to the SNRE in response to technological, economic and political developments.  A research and development strategy for France, based on an integrated and systemic vision of energy within the framework of the Energy Union  The European Commission regards energy as one of its priorities, and in February 2015 it published a communicatio - energy security;  - a fully integrated European energy market;  - energy efficiency contributing to moderation of demand;  - decarbonising the economy;  - research, innovation and competitiveness.   R&D in the field of energy technologies is one of the five dimensions of the Energy Union and is also a vital prerequisite for implementing the four other dimensions.   The Member States have defined four common priorities for this fifth dim-Plan:   - being the world leader in developing the next generation of renewable energy technologies;   - facilitating the participation of consumers in the energy transition through smart grids and home systems;  - efficient energy systems, and harnessing technology to make the building stock energy neutral;   - more sustainable transmission systems.     In addition to these four common priorities, Member States that intend to make use of the relevant technologies can collaborate actively at European level on the following two optional priorities:   - a forward-looking approach to carbon capture and storage (CCS) and carbon capture and use (CCU) for the power and industrial sectors;  - maintaining technological leadership in the nuclear domain (fission and fusion), including through ITER.   The priorities that have been set are translated into a concrete action plan on the basis of 10 key actions.  R&D by French entities should therefore be viewed in this wider European context, which means adopting a system-(variable and distributed renewable energy sources), new methods of consumption (proactive role for consumers, energy efficiency, etc.) and new methods of energy transport and storage (smart grids etc.). R&D activities will therefore help to overcome the systematic challenges associated with the European vision set out in the Energy Union package.     78    Aligning action by France with the  The European Union has earmarked substantial amounts of funding for R&D in the field of energy, particularly -nuclear) energy research over the period 20142020. This substantial pool of R&D funding for new energy technologies will be implemented under the future Horizon Europe Programme, which provides in particular for the earmarking of  vement in Horizon 2020 corresponds to its relative contribution to the EU budget, around 16%. Increasing the take-up rate of loans by project organisers based in France (from the current figure of 10%, which has remained stable for several years) therefore represents a major challenge, and steps are being taken to encourage the R&D community within France to work towards this goal, for example by organising national groups and points of contact to shape programme design and increase the level of response to calls for projects. These measures should be continued or strengthened.  R&I potential within France is equivalent to 14.6% of the R&D FTEs for the EU 28 and 16.1% of patent applications by the EU 28 to the European Patent Office. Increasing the take-up rate of loans by project organisers based in France (from the current figure of 10%, which has remained stable for several years) therefore represents a major challenge. Based on work that was carried out with the involvement of the research and innovation community (ministries, research bodies, universities, regional councils, BPI France (a public investment bank), business advisory organisations, Competitiveness Clusters, etc.), the Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation has proposed an action plan structured under three headings: encouraging more stakeholders to take part in the Framework Research and Innovation Programme and coordinating projects, supporting these projects more effectively during their preparatory stages, submitting and executing projects and developing an effective strategy for shaping programmes. This national action plan implementation as a key priority.     2.5.2. Innovation as a means of increasing the competitiveness of French businesses  The Government intends to continue pursuing an ambitious national industrial policy centred around transformation capacity, while focusing in particular on potential relating to innovation and digital technologies (industry accounts for over 60% of private R&D within France).  Priorities identified in this connection include support for innovative projects and the ability of French companies to develop and market products that incorporate cutting-edge technologies; in addition, it is important for these products to allow novel uses or the provision of novel services, since this is regarded as a key differentiator and a key means of competing on the global stage.  2.5.2.1. Measures by the National Industry Council  With a view to achieving this goal, France set up a National Industry Council (CNI) in 2013. The aim of this Council is to provide information and advice to public authorities on the current state of French industry and industrial services at regional, national and international level, including export-related challenges. It is chaired by the Prime Minister, and serves as a platform for companies and employee representatives to discuss strategic topics such as training, innovation, funding for businesses, the circular economy and international development.   The National Industry Council is currently made up of 16 Strategic Sectoral Committees based on the major sectors of French industry, with two cross-disciplinary committees (National Industry Council Digital and National Industry Council International) and four thematic committees (Circular Economy, Jobs and Skills, Europe, Regulation and Simplification).   79    The Strategic Sectoral Committee for New Energy Systems was set up in 2018. It covers an industrial sector -wide contract contains details of four large-scale thematic projects: energy efficiency, renewable energies (with a focus on biogas and offshore wind), storage (batteries and hydrogen) and micro-grids (scaling up of solutions). A strong focus is placed on innovation, particularly with regard to hydrogen, anaerobic digestion and digital technologies.  Several other Strategic Sectoral Committees have emphasised the need for innovation in connection with the energy transition; these include the Automotive Committee (electric vehicles), the Rail Committee (energy optimisation, new powertrains), the Maritime Industries Committee (renewable energies, storage), the Aerospace Committee (electrification, optimisation of internal combustion engines), the Mining and Metallurgy Committee (integration of renewable energies, recycling of batteries), the Chemistry and Materials Committee (thermal management, emergence of a batteries sector), the Construction Committee (energy renovation) and the Waste Committee (solid recovered fuel).  2.5.2.2. Establishment of the Innovation Council in July 2018  Last July, the French Government established an Innovation Council as a strategic body aimed at steering action by the public authorities towards breakthrough innovations. By doing so, the Government hoped to reiterate the priority status of innovation.  The Innovation Council is made up of the Minister of Ecological and Inclusive Transition, the Defence Minister, the Secretary of State for Digital Affairs and the Minister of Action and Public Accounts. BPI France their capacity as innovation funding bodies.  Six qualified professionals from the fields of research, industry, innovation capital, entrepreneurship and the s work.    adopting the major guidelines and priorities for the innovation policy, based on assessments and forecasts;   developing a roadmap that contains measures likely to make innovation policy more cross-sectoral in nature and simplify the funding landscape for innovation players. In particular, this roadmap will ensure that the measures are properly aligned with regional and European frameworks, so that businesses and public research bodies can access the calls for projects that best fit their needs;   drafting recommendations on funding tools for innovation policy, with the aim of promoting the emergence of breakthrough innovations and their mass production in France.  2.5.2.3. The Innovation Fund as a source of funding for the industrial policy  In 2018, the Frenof breakthrough innovations and their mass production in France.   social challenges in several areas regarded as strategic and requiring technological barriers to be overcome. Ultimately, overcoming these major challenges should make it possible to open up new markets in which France can play a leading position, with the parallel growth of an ecosystem of laboratories, start-ups, SMEs and large corporations.  The topics for the major challenges will be chosen by the Innovation Council, whose members represent the world of business, the research community and investors, and which is chaired by the Minister of the Economy  80    and Finance and the Minister of Higher Education, Research and Innovation. One major challenge relating to energy storage was identified in December 2018.  All of these social challenges share the following features:   a scientific and technological scope: each major challenge must address technological obstacles and explore areas that have hitherto been neglected;   society-health, security, mobility and sustainable development;   market prospects: the end goal of each major challenge is the bringing to market of an innovative product the outset;   unique advantages.  2.5.2.4. Competitiveness Clusters  The Competitiveness Clusters policy was launched in 2004 with a view to driving forward action in relation to the key factors in competitiveness, the most important of which include innovation capacity as well as growth and new jobs in lead markets.   A Competitiveness Cluster serves as a platform for large and small businesses, research laboratories and training institutions within a well-defined region to collaborate on work relating to a specific target. Public authorities at local and national level are closely involved in these measures.  A Competitiveness Cluster is aimed at supporting innovation. It promotes the development of collaborative and especially innovative research and development (R&D) projects. It also supports the evolution and growth of its member companies, in particular by bringing to market new products, services or processes that are developed as an offshoot of research projects. Competitiveness Clusters act as drivers of growth and jobs by allowing the businesses involved to become market leaders in France and abroad.  Many different parties are involved in Competitiveness Clusters. All are required for the development of dynamic, wealth-generating ecosystems.  Several Competitiveness Clusters relate directly to energy: Capénergies, Derbi, Tenerrdis, S2E2 and Energivie.  In 2018, the Competitiveness Clusters were rebranded in order to keep up momentum and encourage individual clusters to join together to achieve a critical size.  2.5.2.5. Macroeconomic assessment of the energy transition  France has assessed the macroeconomic impact of its energy transition policy for the period through to 2030. It calculates this impact by comparing the scenario currently backed by the Government against a scenario based on the continuation of current measures. The following percentage differences (between the WAM and WEM scenarios) are based on projections for jobs, the balance of trade, energy consumption and the government balance:    2023  2028  2030  GDP (% difference between WAM and WEM)  1.3  2.1  2.5  Added value of market sector (% difference between WAM and WEM)  1.8  2.6  3.1   81    Household consumption (% difference between WAM and  WEM)  0.6  1.3  3.3  Real disposable income of households (% difference between WAM and WEM)  1  2.2  2.9  Jobs (number)  238,000  440,000  540,000  Balance of trade (% of nominal GDP)  0.1  -0.4  -0.6  Energy consumption (% of nominal GDP)  -0.5  -0.9  -1  Government balance (% of nominal GDP)  0.6  1.1  1.3         