2.2.i.). The precise details of this increase depend on the supporting measures to be fleshed out in the course of national processes in the buildings sector.   2.2. Energy efficiency dimension 2.2.i. The elements set out in Article 4(b)   In June 2018, an agreement was reached at EU level between the Member States, the European Parliament 48  and the European Commission (the agreement entered formally into force in late 2018) to achieve a drop in primary energy consumption of 32.5% by 2030 compared to the value currently forecast for that year; this agreement was enshrined in the recast version of the EU Energy Efficiency Directive (EED). The Member States must report their national indicative contributions to this goal. As part of its Energy Efficiency Strategy 2050, the Federal Government has set a national energy efficiency goal for 2030 of -30% primary energy consumption (compared to 2008). The German energy efficiency goal for 2030 corresponds to primary energy consumption of approx. 240 Mtoe in 2030 (including non-energy consumption) or primary energy consumption of approx. 216 Mtoe excluding non-energy consumption, on the assumption that the latter remains more or less constant. The calculations from the modelling carried out by the Federal Government regarding the effects of the climate protection measures in the NECP show a drop in final energy consumption down to 185 Mtoe by 2030. The Federal Government is aiming to achieve a continual reduction in energy consumption in the decade 2021-2030.  example, in the following comparison: EU-wide primary energy consumption must be reduced EU-wide by 18.5% contribution (on the basis of the same baseline year, 2017) represents a reduction in energy consumption of at least 28%. Achievement of the energy efficiency goal will make a significant contribution to helping ensure that the under the Paris Agreement based on the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in accordance with which the rise in average global temperatures must be kept well below 2°C and where possible 1.5°C compared to pre-industrial levels in order to minimise the effects of global climate change, as 23 September 2019 in New York, to pursue the long-term goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions to net zero emissions by 2050.  Cumulative final energy savings pursuant to Article 7 of the EU Energy Efficiency Directive (EED)  Based on the statistical data currently available from Eurostat, the cumulative savings target pursuant to Article 7(1), first sentence, (b) of the Energy Efficiency Directive is 3 996.5 PJ or 95.46 Mtoe for the period 2021 to 2030. Notification thereof is to be provided on the basis of Annex III of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 on the governance of the energy union and climate action (concerning the notifmeasures and methodologies to implement Article 7 of Directive 2012/27/EU). The notification required in accordance therewith is attached to this text, in addition to the other required information, as an annex pursuant to Article 3(2)(h) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999. The calculation of the savings target pursuant to Article 7(1), first sentence, (b) of the Energy Efficiency Directive is based on Eurostat data regarding final energy consumption in Germany between 2016 and 2018.  Long-term renovation strategy pursuant to Article 2a of the Directive on the energy performance of buildings  Like all sectors, the buildings sector must make an appropriate contribution to the long-term climate goal for 2050. Adjusting to the effects of global climate change also presents new challenges for the buildings sector.  Annual final energy consumption in the buildings sector, approx. two thirds of which is attributable to the buildings sector and around one third of which is attributable to industrial and commercial processes, was 898 TWh in 2016. This corresponds to around 35.9% 14% (only direct emissions) or around 25% of greenhouse gas emissions (including electricity and district heating in buildings). In accordance with the Climate Protection Act (specifically the source principle), the buildings sector will be permitted to emit only 70 MtCO2eq in 2030. What is more, Germany has set itself the goal, in terms of final energy consumption in the heating and cooling sector, of achieving a share of renewable energies in final energy consumption for heating and cooling of 27% (see Section 2.1.2.ii). The Energy Efficiency Strategy for Buildings of 18 November 2015 is also crucial for the buildings sector. There is also potential for energy consumption in the buildings sector to be significantly reduced and for renewable energies for producing heating and cooling to be used efficiently. An appropriate combination of the two could be used to essentially create solutions with 2030 and 2050 in mind. It is important to ensure here that these are feasible, affordable, economical, open to different types of technology, sustainable and, not least, reliable, durable and user-friendly. Social impacts also need to be taken into account.  Further savings could be achieved across various sectors by reducing indirect emissions, which occur during the production of building materials, components and plant technology, etc. in the industrial sector. In addition to promoting the use of resource-efficient building materials, the selective dismantling of buildings and the recycling of building materials could also contribute to reducing energy demand here.  49  The Federal Government will submit an overall strategy for existing building stock in the form of the long-term renovation strategy pursuant to Article 2a of the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive.  Total floor area to be renovated/energy savings to be achieved pursuant to Article 5 of the EU Energy Efficiency Directive with reference to the exemplary role of public buildings  Article 5 EED (2012/27/EU) requires Member States to ensure that buildings owned and occupied by the central government meet the national minimum energy performance requirements. At least 3% of the building stock which does not meet these minimum requirements must be renovated each year. Member States may opt for an alternative approach which results in a comparable level of energy savings. The total floor area to be renovated or the equivalent annual energy savings to be made must furthermore be reported for the period 2021 to 2030, pursuant to Article 4(4) of the provisional final version of the Governance Regulation. The savings to be made could be calculated using the methodology developed by the Federal Ministry of the Interior, Building and Community (Report II7-01-10-01-2017 by the Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Development). A suitable system will be developed for the purpose of monitoring the savings achieved.  2.2.ii. The indicative milestones for 2030, 2040 and 2050, the domestically established measurable progress indicators, an evidence-based estimate of expected energy savings and wider benefits, and cy targets as included in the roadmaps set out in the long-term renovation strategies for the national stock of residential and non-residential buildings, both public and private, in accordance with Article 2a of Directive 2010/31/EU  The indicative milestone will be established with the long-term renovation strategy in accordance with Article 2a, paragraph 2 of the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive, which will be communicated to the EU Commission as soon as possible. On account of the fact that the contributions of the individual sectors to reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Germany for subsequent years after 2030 have still not been set out at national level and that important specifications still need to be set out at European level, Germany will quantify the milestones for 2040 and 2050 when the necessary guidelines have been set out at national and European level. This will be no later than the point at which the annual emissions levels are updated in the Climate Protection Act in 2025. A qualitative classification will be undertaken for the period after 2030 in the current LTRS. The indicators and indicative milestones will be further developed as part of the update of the LTRS by 30 June 2024.  Germany will set out energy performance as the first indicator. In the course of updating the LTRS, Germany will also check the configuration of other indicators, in particular regarding final energy consumption. Other indicators may also emerge as a result of the continuation of the buildings database (e.g. regarding the rate and extent of renovation), approaches to the classification of energy performance certificates and the heating label.  Table A14: Indicative milestone in accordance with the long-term renovation strategy  2008 2030 (Baseline year) Energy performance  non-renewable primary energy consumption (PECn.R. in PJ)  4,400  2,000  2.2.iii. Where applicable, other national objectives, including long-term targets or strategies and sectoral targets, and national objectives in areas such as energy efficiency in the transport sector and with regard to heating and cooling     Transport  The 2010 Energy Concept stipulates that final energy consumption in the transport sector must be reduced by around 10% by 2020 and by around 40% by 2050 (in both cases compared to 2005). In addition, the independent of fossil carbon fuels and therefore largely GHG-neutral by 2050