2.5. Research, innovation and competitiveness dimension 60  2.5.i. National objectives and funding targets for public and, where available, private research and innovation relating to the energy union including, where appropriate, a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met  Research and development into innovative energy technologies and the demonstration of these technologies rely not only on the involvement of the private sector, but also on public research funding. The aim of the latter should be to support and promote collaboration on technological developments and innovations by industrial players, research institutions and universities; topics may range from fundamental research or applied research through to the transfer of technologies or innovations to the market. Public funding for energy political goals and addresses major challenges relating to the energy transition. The central framework for -departmental energy research programme, which is a multi-annual programme aimed at steering the funding activities of the various ministries involved. The current Seventh Energy Research Programme of the Federal Government was adopted in September 2018. The programme focuses on accelerated transfer and extensively aligns energy research with the needs of the energy transition. As such, it is built around the following goals:   Driving forward the energy transition: The primary goal of research funding is the development of innovative and holistic solutions to the challenges associated with the energy transition and a rapid time-to-market for these solutions. Progress towards this goal is supported by means of a broad funding approach along the entire energy chain and a particular focus on the transfer of findings. Attention is paid not only to the technical dimensions of the energy transition, but also to its non-technical dimensions such as societal processes or innovation-friendly framework conditions and their interactions. Innovative technologies and concepts are prioritised if they can deliver significant progress in terms of increasing efficiency and integrating renewable energies into demand sectors. Particular importance is attached to the complex tasks faced in the heating sector (space heating and process heat).   : Research funding in the energy reputation as an industrial powerhouse. This will also improve the competitiveness of German companies (see 2.5.iii). Key tasks include makipreserving and expanding technological know-how in the energy sector and improving export opportunities for innovative energy technologies. Research funding is therefore also targeted at technologies for global markets, particularly those in developing and threshold countries. An especially key task involves the activation of innovation potential in small and medium-sized companies and start-ups.   Risk provisioning at a macro-social level: The technology-neutral approach enshrined in the Seventh Energy Research Programme is aimed at ensuring that energy research rapidly develops and makes ready for use a broad range of potential technologies for the transformation of the energy sector. This will provide the room for manoeuvre needed to respond to future developments which cannot yet be foreseen. Since climate change and environmental impacts do not respect national borders, it is important to develop highly efficient renewable energy technologies and system solutions with a view to solving related problems not only at a domestic but also at a global level.  -neutral approach and covers a broad range of sustainable energy technologies. In thematic terms, the Seventh Energy Research Programme also reflects the core and special priorities of the European Strategic Energy Technology (SET) Plan and the energy union which are most relevant to Germany. Priority is given to areas which have the potential to contribute to the energy transition as well as economic importance and innovation potential. The relative importance of individual areas of research is continuously assessed. Certain areas of research are specifically activated through funding announcements and complementary strategies. Between 2020 and 2022, around EUR 1.3 billion per annum will be provided by the Federal Government for research funding as part of the Seventh Energy Research Programme. The Federal Government is striving to ramp up energy research in the period between 2020 and 2030. The long lead times between research and widespread use mean, in view of the target date of 2050, that application-oriented energy research needs to be stepped up.    2.5.ii. Where available, national 2050 objectives related to the promotion of clean energy technologies and, where appropriate, national objectives including long-term targets (2050) for deployment of low-carbon technologies, including for decarbonising energy- and carbon-intensive industrial sectors and, where applicable, for related carbon transport and storage infrastructure  61  Carbon dioxide emissions are the chief driver of anthropogenic climate change. In Germany, most CO2 emissions result from the use of fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas. One of the main goals of energy policy is therefore to reduce energy-related carbon emissions. Energy research tackles this goal through increased energy efficiency, the integration of renewable energy into the energy system and the development of alternative industrial processes which generate fewer or no greenhouse gas emissions.  Two complementary strategies are being followed in the area of industrial processes. Firstly, increased energy efficiency based on lower energy inputs will lead to a permanent drop in energy-related carbon emissions in the industrial sector. Secondly, technologies for closing the carbon cycle will be developed for certain industrial processes in which the generation of carbon is difficult or even impossible to avoid. Technologies which separate carbon out of industrial exhaust gases and in particular the atmosphere are needed for this (carbon dioxide removal  CDR). They can be biological in nature (plant growth) or technological (direct air capture  DAC), whereby sustainability criteria need to be developed and taken into consideration. Research into carbon separation, transport, storage, long-term sequestration and use technologies will be stepped up so that domestic companies and research institutions can assume a pioneering role in this area, which furthermore holds tremendous export potential. For example, carbon dioxide can be used in the chemicals industry as a starting point for the manufacture of inputs into other processes (by converting it into polymers, basic chemicals, etc.). It can also be used to manufacture liquid fuels.  2.5.iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to competitiveness   The long-term transformation into an economy and society with net zero emissions in accordance with the Paris Agreement can only be successfully achieved in conjunction with industry. According to a communication on industrial policy issued by the EU in September 2017, the target EU-wide industry share of economic output is 20% (current figure in Germany: 23%). Against this backdrop, a successful energy transition must be designed in such a way as to preserve the industrial basis as a key factor in job growth and retention. International competitive framework conditions are therefore required. Three factors are of vital importance when it comes to shaping the energy transition in energy-intensive industries: cost trends (in particular competitive energy prices), guaranteed security of supply and a reliable framework. Increased energy and emissions trading costs may place companies at a competitive disadvantage, particularly if they are active on the global stage. Planning and investment security is vital for companies in Europe, and their international competitiveness must be maintained in order to prevent the outsourcing of production and jobs   Innovative energy technologies which contribute to both climate protection and industry policy goals are of decisive importance in this respect. Industry plays a particularly prominent role in tackling the economic consequences of climate change, increasing resource and energy efficiency and using more renewable energies. Industrial processes alone account for around 7% of German greenhouse gas emissions, for example. Consideration must also be given to energy demand in the industry sector and the resulting emissions.  At the same time, the long-term transition to net zero emissions offers opportunities for economic growth and employment and potential in terms of industrial production or the establishment of technological supply chains. German industry  in particular machinery and plant engineering, instrumentation and control engineering and electrical engineering  occupies a world-leading position in terms of potential exports of environmental and climate protection products. This means not only that it is uniquely placed to benefit from these developments, but also that it can leverage its know-how to help solve related challenges.  Research, industry, investors and authorities are working together closely to leverage the opportunities which emerge in all of the leading markets and key areas of technology where Germany has a presence, using targeted innovation processes which deliver energy-efficient and climate-friendly solutions. To list but a few examples, it is important to harness the potential of sectoral coupling and storage and efficiency technologies, as well as the opportunities available in the raw materials industries and in the fields of plant engineering and -and employment.  Sustainably increasing the competitiveness of German and EU industry is a key goal of the 2030 National Industrial Strategy. The strategy focuses on industry, which must continue to be competitive so that prosperity, employment and the private financing of environmental measures can be secured in the long term. A modern industrial policy involves the triad of goals, namely economic performance, social justice and sustainability in all areas.    