3.4.  3.3.ii.10. Pentalateral Energy Forum  security of the electricity supply Since 2015, the transmission system operators in the countries which belong to the Pentalateral Energy Forum have published regular joint reports on the security of the electricity supply in the region. The methodology followed is the same as that for the national report (see above) and the European Mid-Term Adequacy Forecast. In 2018, the Member States also carried out a first joint crisis exercise involving the transmission system operators, the regulatory authorities and the ministries in the region. The aim of this exercise was to prepare the Member States for closer cooperation within the meaning of the proposed regulation on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector. Further details in this respect can be found in Section 3.4.  3.3.iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds   The electricity grids, together with the reserves such as capacity reserve and network reserve or the security stand-by, make a significant contribution to security of the energy supply. The electricity and reserves are financed through the network charges.  In the gas sector, the security of supply is ensured by modern and well-developed transmission systems (see Chapter 2.4.2.)   3.4. Internal energy market dimension 3.4.1. Electricity infrastructure 3.4.1.i. Policies and measures to achieve the targeted level of interconnectivity as set out in Article 4(d)   3.4.1.i.1. Network Development Plan (NDP)  Electricity Pursuant to §12b of the Energy Industry Act, transmission system operators are obliged to produce a joint NDP on a 2-yearly basis. This plan sets out shared infrastructure requirements for the next 10 to 20 years. Following its approval by the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railways and its inclusion in the Federal Requirements Plan pursuant to §12e of the Energy Industry Act, the requirements set out therein are of a binding nature.  In addition, the measures set out in Section 3.4.2.i. relating to the monitoring and controlling of the grid expansion projects for electricity also contribute to achieving the targeted level of interconnectivity.  3.4.1.i.2. Interconnector expansion projects under the Energy Line Expansion Act and the Federal Requirements Planning Act With a view to meeting the requirements imposed under Article 4(d), the Federal Government is planning 10 interconnector projects under the Energy Line Expansion Act and the Federal Requirements Planning Act (Tables A14 and A15). Most of these projects are also projects of common interest (PCI). The projects in Table A15 are already at the construction stage and should be in operation by 2020. Implementation of these projects may make it possible to achieve the indicators under Article 4(d). In the current Network Development Plan (NDP) 20192030, further projects underwent a cost-benefit analysis as provided for in Article 4(d)(1) of the Governance Regulation. Price differences between Germany and the neighbouring countries affected play a key role in the examination of these projects.  Table A15: Interconnectors currently under construction and scheduled to come into operation by 2020  106   Project  No according to Energy Line Expansion Act/Federal Requirements Planning Act  No under TYNDP Target date according to the latest monitoring report from the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railways  European status GermanyDenmark (Kriegers Flak Combined Grid Solution, P64)  No 29 under the Federal Requirements Planning Act  36/141  2020  PCI 4.1 GermanyNetherlands Niederrhein/Wesel  Netherlands Doetinchen  No 13 under the Energy Line Expansion Act  113/145  implemented  PCI 2.12  Table A16: Additional interconnectors scheduled to come into operation between 2020 and 2030 under the Energy Line Expansion Act and the Federal Requirements Planning Act*   Project  No according to Energy Line Expansion Act/Federal Requirements Planning Act  No under TYNDP Target date according to the latest monitoring report from the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railways  European status GermanyDenmark (Central Axis) Kassø  Hamburg North  Dollern  No 1 under the Energy Line Expansion Act  39 251  2020  PCI 1.4.1 GermanyPoland  Baczyna  No 12 under the Energy Line Expansion Act  229/230  (>2030)  GermanyPoland (Uckermark line) Neuenhagen  Krajnik  No 3 under the Energy Line Expansion Act  94/139  2022  PCI 3.15.1 GermanyNorway (NordLink Germany  Norway, P68)**  No 33 under the Federal Requirements Planning Act  37/142  2021  PCI 1.8 GermanyDenmark (West Coast Line Niebüll  border with Denmark, P25)  No 8 under the Federal Requirements Planning Act  183  2023  PCI 1.3.1 107  GermanyAustria (measures M94b/M95: No 40 under the Federal Requirements Planning Act 198 2023  Lake Constance/ Neuravensburg  border with Austria)     GermanyBelgium (Alegro Oberzier  border with Belgium, P65)  No 30 under the Federal Requirements Planning Act  92  2020  PCI 2.2.1 GermanyAustria (Isar  St. Peter: Altheim  border with Austria, P67/P112)  No 32 under the Federal Requirements Planning Act  47/187  2028  PCI 3.1.1  * According to information from the Federal Network Agency (www.netzausbau.de/leitungsvorhaben) ** Actual start of operation is expected to take place in December 2020.  Table A17: New interconnectors (not yet in the Federal Requirements Planning Act)*   Project  No under TYNDP Target operations date according to the transmission system operators  European status Germany-United Kingdom (NewConnect) 309 2022 Germany-United Kingdom (NewConnect)  Germany-Sweden (Hansa Power Bridge I)  176  2025/2026 Germany-Sweden (Hansa Power Bridge I)  Germany-Sweden (Hansa Power Bridge II)  267  2035 Germany-Sweden (Hansa Power Bridge II)  Germany-France (Eichstetten  German border)  228  2025 Germany-France (Eichstetten  German border)  Germany-Luxembourg (Aach  Bofferdange)  328  2026 Germany-Luxembourg (Aach  Bofferdange) * According to information from the Federal Network Agency (www.netzausbau.de/leitungsvorhaben)  3.4.1.ii. Regional cooperation in this area   The scope of regional cooperation projects and collaboration extends beyond electricity infrastructure; the relevant information has been consolidated in Section 3.4.3.vi. for Chapter 3.4. as a whole (Internal energy market dimension).  3.4.1.iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds   The financing measures at national level and through Union funds are summarised in Section 3.4.2.iii.  3.4.2. Energy transmission infrastructure 3.4.2.i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in Section 2.4.2, including, where applicable, specific measures to enable the delivery of projects of common interest (PCIs) and other key infrastructure projects  108   3.4.2.i.1. Electricity Grid Action Plan -fold strategy which responds to the increasing challenges posed by the transport demand growth described in Section 2.4.1. Firstly, existing grids will be optimised and utilised more effectively. This includes technical optimisation and modernisation measures, new technologies and operating concepts and improved congestion management. Secondly, grid expansion measures will be accelerated. This involves the application of predictive controlling principles to grid expansion, procedural streamlining to accelerate planning and approval procedures and financial incentives for grid operators. A number of Electricity Grid Action Plan measures are outlined in greater detail below.  3.4.2.i.2. Monitoring of grid expansion projects for electricity Rapid expansion of domestic and cross-border transmission system infrastructure is of critical importance for the success of the energy transition. The Federal Government also intends to use cutting-edge technology for grid expansion wherever possible. At the same time, the timely implementation of all grid expansion projects under the NDP will only be possible on the basis of regular, transparent and realistic monitoring. Since early 2016, the Federal Network Agency has therefore produced and published quarterly monitoring reports on electricity grid expansion (individual projects under the Energy Line Expansion Act and the Federal Requirements Planning Act and projects relating to connections to offshore wind farms; www.netzausbau.de). The Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy, the Federal Ministry of the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety, the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railways and the federal states also hold regular discussions on the topic. In addition, starting from 2018 transmission system operators are required to submit to the regulatory authority in every even calendar year, by 30 September at the latest, a progress report on the NDP as per §12d of the Energy Industry Act. In 2018 there was also a separate progress report for the offshore sector in accordance with §17c (3) of the Energy Industry Act. The progress report is to contain information on the implementation of the most recently confirmed Network Development Plan. If there are delays, the network operators must give the main reasons for such delays. The progress report must be submitted to the Federal Network Agency. The Federal Network Agency publishes the report and gives all network users the opportunity to comment.  3.4.2.i.3. Controlling of grid expansion projects for electricity In May 2019, the energy ministers of the states and the Federal Government, the Federal Network Agency and the managers of the transmission system operators in Germany agreed on specific timetables with milestones for all grid expansion projects. The six milestones include the start and completion of the Federal planning or regional planning procedure and the planning approval procedure, as well as the start of construction and of operations. The schedules are both ambitious and realistic. They complement the existing monitoring by the Federal Network Agency and are published at www.netzausbau.de. This enables the public to obtain information about the progress on grid expansion at any time. The target vs actual performance comparison of the milestones is a regular part of the 6-monthly ministerial meetings.  3.4.2.i.4. Optimisation and modernisation of the existing grids Optimisation and modernisation of the existing grids is enshrined as an objective in the coalition agreement for the 19th parliamentary term. Grid operators are obliged to operate, optimise, strengthen and expand their nciple is followed, i.e. grid optimisation is prioritised over grid strengthening and expansion. Various measures which increase the interconnectivity of existing electricity grids are planned with this in mind. These include the nationwide roll-out of overhead line monitoring (involving measurements of temperature so that a higher transmission capacity can be used for the lines on a weather-dependent basis), short-term interim measures (in particular phase shifters), optimisation of re-dispatching processes and the introduction / further development of modern digital technologies and system management concepts.  3.4.2.i.5. Accelerated grid expansion With a view to accelerating the process of electricity grid expansion, which is also urgently needed, the Transmission System Expansion Acceleration Act has been amended. Planning and approval procedures have been streamlined and shortened, while still maintaining substantive environmental standards and without limiting the involvement of the public. Approval procedures (particularly in the area of grid optimisation and strengthening) were accelerated, for example by means of notification procedures for cable additions and re-cabling projects. In these cases, one procedural step can now be dispensed with. Predictive planning for future demand has also been made more straightforward. The new rules entered into force in May 2019.  3.4.2.i.6. Fee-related incentives and Incentive Regulation The aim of the Incentive Regulation is to incentivise network operators to engage in behaviour that is stipulates that network operators can only use the network charges to refinance those costs that would arise if the grids were to be operated efficiently. The Incentive Regulation is therefore aimed at increasing the cost-109  effectiveness of electricity and gas network operators as monopolists and limiting network costs in the interests of all customers (whether industrial, commercial or private). The costs of each network operator are reviewed every 5 -cost benchmarking exercise which lends equal weight to capital and operating costs. The network operators are then allocated a certain budget for the performance of their obligations over a 5-year period (regulation period); this represents their revenue ceiling. If they exceed the efficiency requirements, they can retain the additional revenues for the duration of the current regulation period. Work is currently under way to investigate whether further financial incentives could be used to encourage network operators to accelerate grid expansion measures and optimise and modernise the electricity grid. For example, efficiency comparisons have so far ignored congestion management costs on the grounds that they cannot be permanently influenced; as a result, there is no explicit financial incentive to minimise them. Alternatives for handling congestion management costs will be examined in this context, in order to make the costs of congestion management subject, in part if necessary, to an incentivising tool.  3.4.2.i.7. Network Development Plan (NDP)  gas Pursuant to §15a of the Energy Industry Act, transmission system operators are obliged to produce a joint NDP on a 2-yearly basis. This NDP must contain all effective measures both to optimise and reinforce the network and expand it as needed and to ensure the security of supply that are required for safe and reliable network operation of grid facilities in the next 10 years. The distribution system operators provide any information necessary in this respect; see §15a (4) of the Energy Industry Act. Under §15a (1), fourth sentence, of the Energy Industry Act, assumptions about possible disruptions to the security of supply are also incorporated into the preparation of the NDP Gas. After examination by the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railways, this plan has binding force on the transmission system operators.  3.4.2.i.8. Monitoring of grid expansion projects for gas Pursuant to §15b of the Energy Industry Act, transmission system operators are obliged to produce a progress report with regard to the expansion of the gas transmission system infrastructure; the reports are to be produced every even calendar year, as from 1 April 2017. The report must contain information on progress since the publication date of the previous NDP, and in the event of any delays in implementation in respect of individual projects included in the NDP, the main reasons for and possible consequences of such delays, for example with regard to the provision of capacities, must also be given. The Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railways reviews and publishes the progress report and provides all current and potential grid users with an opportunity to submit comments. The results of this consultation are also published by the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railways, and may be incorporated into guidelines for the next NDP process or into other regulatory procedures.  3.4.2.ii. Regional cooperation in this area   The scope of regional cooperation projects and collaboration extends beyond energy transmission infrastructure; the relevant information has been consolidated in Section 3.4.3.vi. for Chapter 3.4. as a whole (Internal energy market dimension).  3.4.2.iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds   Investments in the expansion, reinforcement and optimisation of transmission systems are not only important refinancing of these costs is regulated via the Incentive Regulation and the Electricity Network Fee Regulation Ordinance. As a tool, the investment measure is a separate refinancing instrument for essential investments aimed at expansion and restructuring in the transmission network. Certain PCI projects can apply for financial repare for those with CEF funds.   3.4.3. Market integration 3.4.3.i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in Section 2.4.3.   Market integration measures  3.4.3.i.1. Gradual reduction and phase-out of coal-fired power generation based on the recommendations of the Commission on Growth, Structural Change and Employment 110  In early 2019, the Commission on Growth, Structural Change and Employment put forward extensive recommendations on how the phasing-out of coal-fired power generation can be implemented and financed in a socially responsible manner and in compliance with the environmental goals. The installed generation capacity from coal-fired power plants is to be continuously reduced, with the result that the output of the power plants in the market will be around 15 GW lignite and 15 GW hard coal in 2022, a maximum of 9 GW lignite and 8 GW hard coal in 2030, and zero GW by the end of 2038 at the latest. A secure power supply and affordable electricity prices must continue to be ensured. The recommendations put forward by the Commission on Growth, Structural Change and Employment include a social consensus on how the coal phase-out can be achieved by 2038 at the latest. The Federal Government is implementing this in close coordination with the federal states concerned.  Up to now, more than two thirds of emissions in the energy sector have been caused by coal-fired power plants. To achieve the sectoral goals of the Climate Action Plan, a key measure is therefore the progressive replacement of electricity from fossil fuels with electricity from renewable energy sources, and an overall reduction in the demand for electricity through eligible energy efficiency improvement measures. As of 1 April 2020, there are 18.1 GW of lignite-fired power stations and 18.6 GW of hard-coal power plants in the market. In addition, there are 2.3 GW of hard-coal power plants in the network reserve and 2.7 GW of lignite-fired power stations on standby. The Datteln 4 hard-coal power plant with 1.1 GW will come into regular operation in the early summer of 2020. (Source: REMIT information of 27.5.2020). The key energy policy recommendations made by the Commission on Growth, Structural Change and Employment will be implemented with a draft law on the phasing-out of coal passed by the Federal Cabinet on 29 January 2020. The bill is currently being negotiated in the Bundestag and is expected to be adopted before the summer break. This also contributes significantly to achieving the sectoral goal under the Climate Action Plan.  According to the bill, the details of the phasing out of lignite-based power generation are to be determined as amicably as possible in negotiations with the power plant operators. However, the draft already includes a decommissioning pathway for all lignite-fired power stations over 150 MW.  To end the generation of electricity from hard coal, the bill provides for decommissioning tenders with diminishing maximum prices up to 2026. From 2024, the decommissioning of power plants without compensation will also be mandated in order of their age, within the scope of the contract. From 2027, the progressive and continuous reduction of electricity generation from hard coal will be achieved solely by decommissioning power plants in order of their age, without compensation. Lignite-fired power stations with an output of up to and including 150 MW can in principle also participate in the decommissioning tenders, and will be included in the statutory reduction pathway as from 2030. Both for the tender procedures and for the statutory reduction of electricity generation from hard coal, network security will be checked and taken into account at all times. Under the provisions of the Cogeneration Act, a power plant can also be decommissioned by conversion from coal to low-emission fuel. The relevant amendments to the Cogeneration Act are also envisaged in the draft of the law on the phasing-out of coal. The fossil fuel phase-out is to be comprehensively reviewed in 2022, 2026, 2029 and 2032, inter alia with regard to the security of supply, electricity prices and the contribution to achieving the climate goals.  Within this framework, in 2026, 2029 and 2032 a review will also be carried out to determine whether the reduction and phase-out of coal-fired power generation after 2030 can be brought forward 3 years, so that the end date of 31 December 2035 can be achieved. Approval is no longer to be given for the construction of new coal-fired power plants.  The reduction and phase-out of coal-fired power generation is at the same time reason and condition for the payment of structural change subsidies to the federal states. Taking the lead in the structural change associated with the fossil fuel phase-out is of major importance for the Federal Government. In a first step, the immediate action programme for the lignite regions will support projects that can be implemented quickly and efficiently by the federal states. The draft version of a law on structural enhancements in the coal regions, brought in by the Federal Government by a Cabinet decision of November 2019, supports the regions affected by the fossil fuel phase-out with regard to sustainable and future-focused structural growth. At the time of the preparation of this Plan, the bill is in the parliamentary process. The decisions of the Federal Government based on the key points for implementation of the structural policy recommendations of the climate protection  security of supply in Southern Germany and the need to conduct a national analysis of the security of supply as a necessary precondition for the establishment of (potentially regional) systematic incentives to investment, will continue to apply.  The gradual reduction and phase-out of coal-fired power generation goes hand in hand with accompanying structural measures. These measures are set out in Section 3.4.3.iv.  3.4.3.i.2. Sectoral coupling The Federal Government plans to press ahead with sectoral coupling, or in other words the efficient use, both 111  direct and indirect, of electricity from renewable energies, in order to replace fossil fuels in the areas of heating, industry and transport. Work needs to be done to identify ways of eliminating obstacles to sectoral coupling. The aim is to create a level playing field for the various sectoral coupling technologies. The first prerequisite for properly functioning sectoral coupling is the provision and further development of supra-regional and local energy infrastructure. The Federal Government therefore plans to expand energy infrastructures as needed and develop them further on a cost-effective basis and in line with the principles of the energy transition, in order to render them available for sectoral coupling purposes. Programmes and demonstration projects will be implemented to support these efforts, for example in relation to cost-effective and rapidly achievable options for expanding charging infrastructures, or efficient heating networks based on renewable energies. Fair conditions of competition will also be established so that the market can decide which technologies are most successful and will therefore be used. This incentivises innovation and brings modern technologies to the market. In an ideal situation, efficient sectoral coupling (and therefore decarbonisation) should be driven primarily by the market and facilitated by price signals without lock-in effects. If sectoral coupling is to make a significant contribution to achievement of the goals under the Energy Concept and the Climate Action Plan 2050, framework conditions for the efficient use of electricity from renewables must be improved across all sectors and steps must be taken to provide additional generation capacities and the transport capacities which will then be needed within the electricity transmission and distribution networks.  3.4.3.i.3. Measures in the Action Plan for Reducing Grid Congestion The new EU electricity market regulation 2019/943 stipulates that at least 70% of electricity transmission capacity must be available for cross-transmission system. Until the planned, major high-voltage DC transmission lines are put into operation, it can be expected that the requirements imposed at EU level will lead to an intensification of grid congestion in Germany. Article 15 of the EU electricity market regulation stipulates that Member States that submit an action plan can be allowed a transitional period. They do not have to achieve the target of 70% until 31 December 2025. Until then, they must progressively increase their trading capacities on the basis of an upward, linear trajectory. This gives them time to reduce internal congestion through measures in the area of grid expansion and grid optimisation.  A condition for the action plan is that transmission system operators must identify one or more structural bottlenecks for the event that the 70% target for cross-border trading had already been reached upon the entry into force of the regulation on 1 January 2025. The four German transmission system operators identified such structural bottlenecks in Germany in a report to the Federal Network Agency. The Federal  November 2019, and thus formally opened the way for this action plan.  The Federal Government presented an action plan at the end of 2019. This action plan contains concrete measures with a timetable for reducing the structural grid congestion. The time frame of the measures is 4 years. The action plan thus meets the requirements under Article 15(1) of the EU electricity market regulation. Pursuant to Article 14(7), the action plan may be national or multinational. Due to its central geographic location in Europe, Germany has decided to also include cross-border activities in the action plan.  One set of national measures consists of those aimed at increasing power transmission capacity. These include the extensive, planned grid expansion projects up to 2030. Germany is planning more new kilometres of transmission infrastructure than any other Member State. Measures to accelerate grid expansion are aimed at streamlining and shortening approval procedures, improving incentives for grid operators to undertake line expansion, the application of predictive controlling to allow better monitoring of the progress of grid expansion and enable obstacles to be identified at an early stage, and steps to increase acceptance of grid expansion. Measures to optimise the existing grid include in particular new technologies in the areas of grid elements and grid management, with the aid of which the grids can be more fully utilised, meaning more electricity can be transported.  The other set of measures detailed in the action plan consists of initiatives to improve congestion management. These support the measures that are directly grid-related, thereby facilitating the required increase in cross-border trading until the grid is strengthened. The focus here is on various measures relating to the topic of re-dispatching, including, for example, improved re-dispatching processes for transmission and distribution system operators, and the bringing in of new domestic and foreign potentials in order to make congestion management more effective and cost-efficient overall. In this section the action plan also explains why Germany is claiming an exemption under Article 13(3) of the EU electricity market regulation and is opting for cost-based re-dispatching. Market-side measures aimed at reducing congestion include tighter regional control of the extension of generation circuits, in order to tackle the problem of electricity being generated in locations which are geographically remote from the load centres. With the gradual phasing-out of coal-fired power generation, which Germany is implementing for climate protection reasons, care will be taken to ensure that this is done in as grid-compatible a manner as possible.  112  Some measures call for cross-border cooperation. Germany is therefore committed to bilateral and multilateral collaborations with neighbouring countries. The regional processes provided for in EU law will still take some time to be implemented. Bilateral and multilateral collaborations help to bridge this period and move forward with electricity trading, to strengthen secure grid management and to reduce grid congestion.  The action plan also provides information on the linear trajectory to the gradual opening of the border in the transition period. Opening at 70% of the transmission capacity of the interconnectors must be accomplished by the end of the transition period, i.e. by 31 December 2025 at the latest. Until then, linear growth trajectories indicate the minimum amount of line capacity that the transmission system operators must keep free for international trading. The starting values of the growth trajectories differ between the regions. They are based on the average trade capacity in 2018 or the average trade capacity in the years 2016-2018, depending on which of the two values is higher.  3.4.3.i.4. Cross-border measures in the Action Plan for Reducing Grid Congestion  Many measures which have a positive impact on grid congestion can only be implemented together with neighbouring countries, for example because they require joint coordinated action. To name one example, cross-border re-dispatching can only be optimised if neighbouring states work closely together. Current studies by Consentec and IFHT show that the optimisation of cross-border re-dispatching can significantly reduce re-dispatching costs for the entire region and that it contributes to meeting the European requirements for electricity trading. There is grid congestion within the European electricity grids which cannot be effectively resolved with purely national measures. For that reason, Germany already cooperates with many neighbouring countries on the re-dispatch processes. These mostly bilateral collaborations should be supplemented by further partnerships. A trilateral cooperation on re-dispatching, which is to be implemented this year, is planned with the Czech Republic and France. In the medium term, cross-border re-dispatching is to be optimised across the entire region. The transmission system operators are currently developing a methodology for this, which will then be approved by the national regulatory authorities. To bridge the intervening period, the existing re-dispatching collaborations are to be continued and, wherever possible, extended.  Measures for improved market coupling  3.4.3.i.5. Creation of a Central and Eastern European Capacity Calculation Region (CORE)  markets. For example, flow-based market coupling (FBMC) was established for the first time between the countries of the Pentalateral Energy Forum (without Switzerland; see Section 3.4.1.ii.) in May 2015. The aim of these flow-based capacity calculations is to improve utilisation of the existing grid infrastructure. Market coupling in this context will initially focus on day-ahead electricity trading. Flow-based market coupling has since become the accepted end goal for almost all EU Member States within the framework of Network Code Capacity Allocation and Congestion Management (CACM). The second stage of the process will therefore be to expand flow-based market coupling to a joint Central and Eastern European Capacity Calculation Region (CORE). This relates back to a decision taken by the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER) in November 2016. Work is also being carried out at the borders with Denmark and Sweden to standardise capacity calculations; flow-based market coupling is not yet being used in this connection, however.  3.4.3.i.6. Coupling of intra-day electricity trading Alongside the cross-border day-ahead market, cross-border intra-day trading is also growing in significance. This is supported by two parallel processes aimed at optimising intra-day trading capacities; the first of these is the XBID (Cross-Border Intra-Day) project, which has connected the intra-day markets in Northern, Western and Southern Europe since June 2018, initially on the basis of conventional capacity allocation. Efforts are also under way to expand this market coupling towards Eastern Europe. The second of these processes is the expansion of flow-based market coupling to cover intra-day trading. Both help to ensure that cross-border electricity markets can exchange flexibility resources at short notice (in almost real time), and therefore respond jointly to short-term changes in generation and demand.  3.4.3.ii. Measures to increase the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production such as smart grids, aggregation, demand response, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, real-time price signals, including the roll-out of intra-day market coupling and cross-border balancing markets   Measures to ensure adequacy  3.4.3.ii.1. Measures to ensure adequacy of the energy system  2.0 and jointly guarantee reliability of supply within Europe. The electricity market itself will then ensure that the correct amounts are invested in generation and flexibility. The principle of free price formation is enshrined in the Energy Industry Act. At the same time, market players have been given strong incentives to safeguard their supply of 113  electricity. These measures have strengthened existing market mechanisms. This makes it possible for the electricity market itself to refinance any additional capacities it needs.  3.4.3.ii.2. Additional measures aimed at achieving a flexible and efficient power supply These include, for example, new areas of cooperation in connection with the European electricity markets, further development of balancing markets and debates on the future nature of network charges. Various national measures are aimed at building a sound basis for the Electricity Market 2.0. Integration of the wholesale electricity market in Europe should be completed as soon as possible in order to define security of supply at European level, to ensure that sufficient capacities are available in the common internal market in the event of a shortage and to ensure that electricity can in fact be transported across borders. Regional cooperation is a driver of integration between the European electricity markets.  3.4.3.ii.3. Guaranteed energy system flexibility hnologies have similar access to the market. For the first time, all of these obstacles to flexibility were listed and measures for eliminating them discussed in a time-consuming process which culminated in the publication by the Federal Ministry of Economdated October 2014 (Green Paper on Electricity)) and a white paper (White Paper on Electricity, dated July 2015). Some of these measures were implemented in the Electricity Market Act of July 2016. The findings -term trends  of Economic Affairs and Energy was based on this research; it outlined the obstacles to flexibility which still exist or may emerge before 2030, and which measures could be taken to eliminate them.  Measures to ensure flexibility  3.4.3.ii.4. Needs-based grid expansion and modernisation Well-developed electricity grids are one of the most cost-effective ways to create flexibility. That makes it all the more important to eliminate obstacles in order to avoid any delays in grid expansion and modernisation, thereby increasing the flexibility of the electricity market.  3.4.3.ii.5. Increased integration and flexibility of European electricity markets The European electricity system allows participants to respond to flexible generation and consumption, thereby reducing overall electricity production costs and capacity demand. Wind and solar electricity are to be integrated into the energy system, in particular on the basis of intra-day trading within Europe (in almost real time). Lead markets for intra-day and day-ahead trading will also be strengthened (for further details, see Section 3.4.3.i. (Measures for improved market coupling)).  3.4.3.ii.6. Fair and system-focused network funding The aim is for the network fee system to help network users behave in a way which increases the security and cost-effectiveness of the power supply. It must therefore be tailored to a modern electricity system. Investigations must be carried out into ways of eliminating obstacles to market-driven flexibility on the part of generators and consumers without at the same time incentivising inefficient grid dimensioning.  3.4.3.ii.7.  in grid expansion areas which are at particular risk of congestion are obliged (upon request by transmission system operators) to reduce the feed-in of cogenerated power if there is congestion in the transmission system, and to generate the heating required using a Power-to-Heat (PtH) facility. This relieves network congestion and avoids the electricity generated from renewables being curtailed (to the extent of the reduction in feed-in from the cogeneration plant and the additional consumption of heating from the PtH facility). The system as a whole also becomes more flexible, since cogeneration plants with the ability to generate heat can move flexibly between the supply and demand side of the electricity market, and the transmission network operators can harness this potential for flexibility when they operate the grid.  3.4.3.ii.8. Flexible cogeneration plants as a transition technology reduction between now and 2030, and even beyond that date. In order to do so, they must reduce emissions in the electricity and heating market and respond flexibly to fluctuating renewable feed-ins. The Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy intends to launch a number of pilot projects involving cogeneration plants, and is therefore issuing calls for tenders for innovative cogeneration systems. In general, these innovative CHP systems are intended to demonstrate how the cogeneration plants of the future will be able to respond with dual flexibility by providing both renewable heat and renewable electricity. During periods when a lot of heat from renewable energies is being fed in, the CHP plant reduces its production of heat and saves fuels and emissions. During times when a lot of electricity from renewable energies is being fed in, the CHP plant reduces its production of electricity and again saves fuels and emissions. If a lot of electricity from renewable energies is available and trading prices are low or negative, the electrical heat generator can also 114  reduce the burden on the electricity market. The technology converts a rigid and heat-dependent minimum generation system into a system based on flexible demand for electricity. The technology is also used under generation will be developed further in the future and comprehensively modernised to secure its future within the framework of the energy transition.  3.4.3.ii.9. Optimisation measures relating to re-dispatching Ever more attention is being paid to the question of how interactions between the electricity market and the electricity grid should be organised to ensure that the system as a whole can be operated safely and cost-effectively, the share of renewable energies in electricity generation can be increased, and sectoral coupling can be further developed. Measures currently planned include:   Higher level of utilisation of the existing grid in order to increase transport capacities. There is potential for optimisation in the electricity grid in the form of more efficient network utilisation. By consistently implementing cutting-edge technology, higher transport capacities can be achieved. Model-based estimates of potential have shown that by more actively controlling electricity flows using phase shifters in conjunction with weather-dependent overhead line operation, the transport capacity of the grid can be substantially increased. In the future, technological developments and innovative operating control concepts offer further potential for optimisation beyond the current state of the art. Measures to mobilise    More efficient organisation of re-dispatching with a view to the gradual shift of current feed-in management systems to a predictable process with financial and energy-related balancing. The most recent amendment to the Transmission System Expansion Acceleration Act contains a provision stipulating that the current feed-in management system  i.e. the balancing of renewable energy and cogeneration plants  will be converted by 1 October 2021 into a uniform regime together with the re-dispatching. In future, re-dispatching will include not only rules governing intervention in the operation of conventional power plants to eliminate bottlenecks, but also rules for renewable energy and cogeneration plants, so that a systematic balancing of feed-in management by running selected generation circuits will also be possible  in contrast to the exchange procurement that has hitherto been the norm.   Cross-border re-dispatching. A research project undertaken by E-Bridge, EWL and IFHT on behalf of the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy has calculated that the cross-border optimisation of re--dispatching requirement by around 30%. Germany therefore supports the development of methods for coordinated cross-border re-dispatching and cross-border cost allocation within the framework of code capacity allocation and congestion management (CACM, Articles 35 and 74).  3.4.3.ii.10. Flexibility check market. Competition between the various flexibility options (expanded electricity networks, flexible power plants and consumers, storage facilities, exchange of electricity with European neighbours)  or in other words Electricity Market 2.0  is particularly cost-effective in this respect. Advantages should not be given to certain technologies through one-sided funding and derogations. The market itself is best placed to make these decisions. Germany has therefore decided, together with its electricity neighbours, that a flexibility check should be carried out for Germany and the other EU Member States involved. The aim of this check will be to identify and eliminate obstacles to increased flexibility of the electricity market. On the basis of the findings which emerge, it will be possible for potential flexibility resources in Germany and other countries to be identified and integrated into the market.  3.4.3.iii. Where applicable, measures to ensure the non-discriminatory participation of renewable energy, demand response and storage, including via aggregation, in all energy markets   Renewable energies are now heavily integrated into the electricity market. The reason for this is the mandatory direct marketing of renewable electricity and funding via a sliding market premium. In 2018, 65% of the total installed capacity from renewable energies was directly marketed via this premium. (Onshore wind 95%, Offshore wind 100%). Up to 2030, this share and thus the market integration of renewables will increase further. Operators or direct marketers of renewable energy installations in the market premium scheme are themselves responsible for the short-term forecasting of their production, and balancing in the event of any differences, and thus assume the same responsibility as conventional power plants. Since 2015, all installations in the direct marketing system have been remotely controllable. When prices are moderately negative, operators and direct marketers have an incentive to curtail or to scale back their systems. They then contribute to system security and are exempted from the surcharge under the Renewable Energy Sources Act, by contrast with installations in the fixed feed-in payment arrangement. 115   In the next few years, additional revenue options may arise in other markets for installations eligible under the Renewable Energy Sources Act. In particular, systems that can be flexibly controlled which claim no fixed feed-in payment under the Renewable Energy Sources Act can participate in the balancing energy market. In addition, from 2021 the first subsidised installation cohorts will start leaving the Renewable Energy Sources Act system and will be actively involved in the energy markets without funding. A range of business models will be established, which will be financed through instruments such as PPAs.  Producers of electricity from renewable energy sources, providers of demand flexibility, storage facilities and aggregators can in principle operate under the same conditions as conventional producers on all energy markets. By shortening the product and tendering periods and reducing the minimum bid amounts, the conditions of participation on the balancing energy markets have been significantly improved for load management providers and aggregators. Balancing group managers have also been obliged to allow an end consumer to provide secondary control power and minute reserve via an aggregator. Distribution system operators must charge low-voltage suppliers and end consumers a reduced grid fee if a control arrangement that is appropriate for the grid can be agreed with them. This rule is currently used primarily by night storage heating systems and heat pumps. The Federal Government will soon be introducing a stakeholder process by way of further refining the rule, with the aim of offering consumers a stronger incentive to make their flexibility available to the network operator.  With regard to their reference current, electricity storage systems are already exempted, through a series of privileges, from the end consumer fees used to finance the electricity system (surcharge under the Renewable Energy Sources Act, grid fees, etc.). In implementing the Clean Energy Package, the Federal Government will examine whether there are still instances in which double charging for stored energy (at feed-in and at final consumption after withdrawal) is occurring. A Federal Government funding programme for home storage systems set up in connection with new PV installations expired in 2018. Monitoring of the funding programme showed that of the 40,000 new home storage facilities installed in 2018, only 5% took advantage of the funding programme. Further funding of home storage systems by the Federal Government does not therefore seem necessary at present.  3.4.3.iv. Policies and measures to protect consumers, especially vulnerable and, where applicable, energy-poor consumers, and to improve the competitiveness and contestability of the retail energy market   Healthy competition exists in Germany among providers in the end energy customer sector. Gerelectricity market already numbers more players than almost any other in the EU. According to the 2017 Monitoring Report by the Federal Network Agency and the Federal Cartel Office, no electricity or gas provider holds a dominant market position. The number of electricity and gas providers in Germany has risen steadily over recent years. In 2016, over 1 400 electricity providers and over 1 000 gas providers were present on the  are not subject to state regulation. The market is characterised by free price formation on the basis of competition. On average, over 50 different providers supply domestic customers within a single distribution network area, and in many distribution network areas there are more than 100 different providers. Competitive price formation and market liberalisation will continue to serve as the foundation for a high level of competitiveness in the electricity and gas end customer market.  3.4.3.iv.1. Protection of energy consumers and competitiveness/market integration at national and European level Germany has put in place many measures to protect consumers. To name one example, providers must comply with various transparency requirements. Consumers can also take their cases to the Schlichtungsstelle Energie e. V. (the arbitration body for energy), which arbitrates on disputes relating to connections to the grid, the supply of energy and the metering of energy (using out-of-court settlements where applicable). The arbitration process is generally free of charge for consumers, and energy supply undertakings are obliged to participate (for a fee); there is a time limit of 3 months, and the process should culminate in a recommendation by the arbitrator. Although these recommendations are not legally binding, many suppliers nevertheless abide by them. In addition, since July 2017, funding has been provided by the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection for the body tasked with observing the energy market in the country as a whole. This body carries out targeted observation of the energy market from a consumer perspective with the help of Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e. V. and the consumer organisations themselves. It will then be possible to build up an overall picture by gathering together the individual complaints. Consumer protection experts will then be able to identify undesirable developments at an early stage and issue prompt alerts so that consumers do not suffer any further harm. The body tasked with observing the energy market will therefore also help to make the energy transition more cost-effective and more socially just for consumers. measures relating to the protection of consumers and the strengthening of consumer rights. They are aimed in particular at increasing transparency for consumers; topics covered include additional billing information 116  during the year (at no charge), minimum requirements for consumption bills and billing information, or the introduction of standards for electricity comparison portals. Once the directive has entered into force, Germany will transpose its provisions into national legislation (unless they are already covered by existing laws).  3.4.3.iv.2. Default and auxiliary supply concept Domestic customers are also protected through the application of a default and auxiliary supply concept. This stipulates that each domestic customer has a fundamental legal right to be supplied with electricity or natural gas by the relevant default supplier under the published general terms and conditions and at the general prices. The energy supply undertaking obliged to provide the default supply in each case is subject to a one-sided obligation to enter into a contract (provided that the company can reasonably be expected to do so on its contract with the customer in the event of a delay in payments is limited by law. No minimum contractual term is stipulated for the default supply, and it can be terminated at any time and at short notice by the customer, without providing a reason.  3.4.3.iv.3. Reduction of electricity costs Concurrently with the introduction of carbon pricing, citizens and the economic sector will benefit from reductions in the electricity price, with the surcharge under the Renewable Energy Sources Act to be progressively paid through a portion of the pricing revenues. This does not affect the payment entitlement for renewable energies under the Renewable Energy Sources Act. Reducing the surcharge under the Renewable Energy Sources Act is intended to provide relief for families and SMEs in particular. This also creates the right incentives for increasing electrification and drives the cross-sector energy transition forward. The further measures under the Climate Protection Programme which could lead to an increase in electricity price components will be implemented by the Federal Government in a sequence of steps that ensures that the electricity price drop is maintained. This does not affect the provisions on electricity price compensation in EU emissions trading. In the Climate Action Plan 2050, the Federal Government decided to review the incentive and the steering effect of government-imposed energy price components in the form of fees, surcharges and taxes. With the Fuel Emissions Trading Act, the Federal Government has made considerable progress in this direction. The government will also examine the suitability of the state-induced price components with a view to the requirements of the energy transition, and put forward a proposal for the further course of action.  3.4.3.iv.4. Change in commuting allowance for long-distance commuters Commuters who have to travel a long distance to work, especially in rural areas, often do not have access to a developed public transport service, and at present, neither adequate charging infrastructure nor vehicles with the appropriate range are available to enable them to switch to e-mobility in the short term. This will change in the coming years. For this reason, to provide relief for these commuters, as from 2021 the commuter tax relief allowance will be increased to 35 cents from the 21st km, limited until 31 December 2026.  3.4.3.iv.5. Changes in housing allowance, tenancy law and energy law To ameliorate social hardship with rising heating costs, those receiving housing benefit will be supported through a 10% increase in the benefit amount. In addition, changes to tenancy rights and energy legislation are being examined that will provide for a restricted right to charge the carbon pricing. This will have a dual incentivising effect: for tenants to behave in an energy-efficient way, and for landlords to invest in climate-friendly heating systems and energy-related renovations.  3.4.3.iv.6. Transfer payments Increased energy costs will be taken into account in the transfer payments in accordance with established procedures.  3.4.3.iv.7. Structural policy supporting measures in connection with the gradual reduction and phase-out of coal-fired power generation With the delivery of the final report to the Federal Government on 31 January 2019, the Commission had finished its work. It recommended that coal-fired power generation be ended in Germany by 2038 at the latest, and at the same time showed how economic structural change in the affected regions could be successfully managed. On the basis of the final report, the Federal Government is working with the states affected to develop an overall structural policy approach to support the coal regions. On 22 May 2019, the key points for implementation of the structural policy recommendations of the Commission on Growth, Structural Change and Employment were approved by the Federal Cabinet. On 28 August 2019 the Federal Cabinet approved important step towards ensuring that funds can be channelled into these areas and specific projects implemented. It is a strong signal of support for the regions affected by the phasing-out of coal-fired power generation.  To support the structural change, the lignite regions will receive financial aid of up to EUR 14 billion for 117  particularly important investments until 2038. Of these funds, 43% is earmarked for the Lausitz mining region, 37% for the Rhine mining region and 20% for the Central German mining region. The legal foundations for this funding will be created in the structural development act, to ensure the financial aid can flow in rapidly. The regions can use the grants to improve their economic conditions in a wide variety of areas, such as business-support infrastructure, improvements to local public transport, the broadband and mobility infrastructure, or for environmental protection and landscape management. Further details will now be settled swiftly in an administrative agreement with the lignite-mining states.  The government will also be supporting the regions through further measures in its own jurisdiction, such as expanding research and funding programmes or setting up federal institutions. In addition, the government aims to expand the transport infrastructures of the regions more quickly and intensively. A newly established high-level joint Federal Government / state panel chaired by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and to support the regions with non-investment, structurally effective expenditure. This programme is currently being developed by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy.  Support will also be given to the locations of hard-coal power plants, where coal is of considerable economic importance and which are structurally weak. The hard-coal sector is considered to be highly relevant if it has a value added share of more than 0.2% in a particular administrative district. In addition, the district of Helmstedt, as a former lignite location, can additionally benefit from structural assistance of up to EUR 90 million. Further details of the funding will be regulated in administrative agreements between the government and the states.  3.4.3.v. Description of measures to enable and develop demand response including those addressing tariffs to support dynamic pricing  3.4.3.v.1. Control and system stabilisation through increased cooperation between transmission and distribution system operators and market players Network operators take decisions based on cost-benefit analyses regarding the network level at which system services are to be provided. The responsibilities of network operators and market players must be clearly defined, and data must be exchanged efficiently and securely. The Federal Government is continuing to work on smart control concepts aimed at ensuring that decentralised generators, storage facilities and loads can take on more system responsibility. There is also an increasing move towards the coordination of system stability at European level.  3.4.3.v.2. Dynamic electricity price agreements and smart meters Under the revised directive on the internal electricity market, electricity generators should be able to offer dynamic electricity pricing agreements. End consumers who have installed a smart meter will have a legal entitlement to such agreements. Electricity consumers will be obliged to provide end consumers with information about the opportunities, costs and risks associated with a dynamic electricity pricing agreement. The national regulatory authority will monitor market progress in this area. The Member State or national regulatory authority will publish an annual report (covering a period of at least 10 years) on key developments electricity tariff to end consumers which incentivises them to save energy or control energy consumption (insofar as technically feasible and financially reasonable).  3.4.3.v.3. Establishment of a core energy market data register register will bring together the core data for all market players and grid-electricity and gas market in the form of a uniform online database.  3.4.3.v.4. Smart Meters Operation Act The Smart Meters Operation Act has formed the legislative basis for the installation and operation of smart meters in Germany since 2016. It stipulates the roll-out of certified devices with a certificate issued by the Federal Office for Information Security, guaranteeing IT security and privacy by design. In order to maximise the benefits, the Smart Meters Operation Act standardises the Smart Meter Gateway as a communication platform for many different use cases (Smart Metering, Smart Grid, Smart Mobility, Smart Home, Smart Services) on the basis of comprehensive protection profiles and technical guidelines. The technical standards are subject to continuous further development along the standardisation roadmap developed by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy / Federal Office for Information Security3. Steps have been taken to ensure the efficiency of the roll-out: Statutory maximum price limits guarantee acceptance and cost-effectiveness. The roll-out begins with the assessment by the Federal Office for Information Security of the technical feasibility for each area of application. The precondition for this is that three mutually independent                                                            3 https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Pressemitteilungen/2019/20190129-roadmap-fuer-intelligente- energienetze-der-zukunft.html 118  manufacturers of Smart Meter Gateways have successfully passed certification. Two manufacturers are currently certified; further certificates are expected in the near future [subject to updates].  3.4.3.vi. Stronger regional cooperation   3.4.3.vi.1. Pentalateral Energy Form  Internal Energy Market The aim of the Pentalateral Energy Forum is to achieve closer coupling between the energy markets of the participating countries, to test and implement new forms of cooperation and to gather experience in the field of cross-border cooperation while doing so. Germany participates in the drafting of the Regional Report on the Security of Supply (see also Section 3.3.i.).  3.4.3.vi.2. Electricity neighbours Germany has been cooperating with its electricity neighbours in this way since 2014, primarily with a view to the national debate on the energy transition.  3.4.3.vi.3. Cooperation in regional groups within the framework of the Trans-European Energy Networks (Trans-European Energy Networks  TEN-E Regional Groups)  Internal energy market Germany is regarded as an affected Member State for four primary energy infrastructure corridors for electricity and therefore belongs to the corresponding TEN-E Regional Groups. These include the North Seas Offshore Grid (NSOG), North-South Electricity Interconnections in Western Europe (NSI West Electricity), North-South Electricity Interconnections in Central Eastern and South Eastern Europe (NSI East Electricity) and the Baltic Energy Market Interconnection Plan in Electricity (BEMIP Electricity, which should not be confused with the BEMIP Cooperation Forum described in Section 1.4.).  3.4.3.vi.4. German/French showcase project for cross-border energy system optimisation (Smart Border Initiative) The German energy agency (dena) and the French energy agency (ADEME) are working together within the framework of the German/French Energy Platform on the implementation of a showcase project for system integration in the form of a cross-optimising the management of distribution networks in the Saarland-Lothringen region using a virtual management tool and a new physical connection at distribution network level. The planned smart grid  - and he project, and for negotiating with the project partners involved (primarily public authorities and companies in the energy sector). In 2017, the project was recognised as a project of common interest (PCI) after    3.4.4. Energy poverty 3.4.4.i. Where applicable, policies and measures to achieve the objectives set out in Section 2.4.4  The Federal Government follows a comprehensive approach to fighting poverty which is not restricted to individual aspects of poverty, such as energy. Costs incurred by households for the purchase of energy are taken into account in the same way as other elements vital for subsistence. The existing legal regulations cover financial support for needy people both over a longer period of time and in specific emergency situations, such as when there is a threat of disruption to the supply. The precise structure of the regulations was explained in Chapter 2.4.4