3.3. Energy security dimension Natural gas  In Germany, a number of stakeholders and all of the gas supply undertakings are responsible for supplying the general public with gas; they each hold individual responsibility for fulfilling this task. The main stakeholders are briefly outlined below, followed by a description of the measures taken in the natural gas sector:   Transmission system operators: Transmission system operators operate systems featuring border or market area crossing points which in particular safeguard the integration of major European import  maintenance and if necessary expansion of a network   Distribution system operator  gas: Distribution system operators distribute gas and are responsible for the operation, maintenance and if necessary expansion of the distribution system in a certain area and (where applicable) of the connecting lines to other systems (see §3(7) of the Energy Industry Act); they may include e.g. municipal utilities.  Underground storage facility operator: Underground storage facility operators store natural gas and are responsible for operating a storage facility (see §3(9) of the Energy Industry Act).  Market area coordinator: Market area coordinators are natural or legal persons appointed by the transmission system operators that act within a market area and provide the services necessary to ensure the efficient handling of gas network access in a market area e §2(11) of the Gas Network Access Regulation). They purchase balancing energy to compensate for physical difference between feed-in and feed-out. They gather information about the supply situation in the market area.  Balancing group manager  gas: A balancing group manager is a natural or legal person responsible vis-à-vis the market area coordinator for handling a balancing group (see §2(5) of the Gas Network Access Regulation). They provide details of gas quantities to transmission system operators and market area coordinators on behalf of their transport customers, are responsible for controlling balancing groups, and are obliged to guarantee the availability of quantities and the balanced status of balancing groups within a market area.  3.3.i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in Section 2.3.     3.3.i.1. Guaranteeing security of supply for domestic customers The transmission and distribution system operators play a key role in this area, since secure and reliable systems are a prerequisite for the supply of gas. They must take into account the need to safeguard the supply of gas to domestic customers during measures pursuant to §16 of the Energy Industry Act. Particularly in cases where there is a risk of gas supply bottlenecks, network operation and the allocation and planning of capacities (including transit capacities) must be implemented in such a way that security of supply is maintained for domestic customers for as long as possible.  3.3.i.2. Provision of information In order to safeguard the supply of gas, the transmission/distribution system operators are obliged (pursuant to §15(2) of the Energy Industry Act) to provide the necessary information to every other operator of gas supply systems linked to their own system. This obligation also applies to operators of storage facilities.  3.3.i.3.  The transmission system operators are responsible for creating long-term bidirectional capacities for load 98  flows in all cross-border interconnectors. They cooperate with neighbouring transmission system operators in order to achieve this goal. There are currently a total of 29 cross-border points, of which seven feature bidirectional physical load flow capacities (not taking into account cross-border gas storage facilities). These capacities are permanently available. There is currently no need for investments by neighbouring foreign grid operators in reverse flow capacities to such investments in future.  3.3.i.4. Energy storage facilities Adequate availability of storage capacity with a high withdrawal rate is vitally important for safeguarding the supply of natural gas, particularly in the event of supply bottlenecks and seasonal fluctuations in consumption. At present, underground storage facilities are operated commercially at 51 locations across Germany. In geographical terms they are distributed over almost the entire country, with regional clusters in North-West Germany as a result of geological factors. Responsibility for the use of commercial storage facilities rests with traders, in line with their obligation to guarantee security of supply; in particular, they must keep adequate quantities of gas in the underground storage facilities to supply customers during the cold period and in the event of unexpected supply failures.  3.3.i.5. Preventive Action Plan for Gas The above measures for the maintenance and (where applicable) improvement of the reliability of supply in kind must be produced pursuant to Articles 8 and 9 of Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply (previously Articles 4 and 5 of Regulation (EU) No 994/2010). The Preventive Action Plan for Gas builds on the outcomes of the risk analysis which each Member State must carry out pursuant to Article 7 of Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply (previously Article 9 of Regulation (EU) No 994/2010). The risk analysis is carried out on behalf of the Federal Government by the Federal Network Agency together with the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy, with the support of the gas industry. The preventive action plan sets out measures aimed at preventing a natural gas supply bottleneck; these measures meet the relevant infrastructure and supply standards, decrease the likelihood of supply crises, avoid regional supply bottlenecks and increase resilience to supply crises. The entry into force of Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply (previously Regulation (EU) No 994/2010) will entail certain amendments to the national preventive action plan and the above-mentioned national provisions.  3.3.i.6.  Led by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy, the process was officially launched in December 2018 to jointly discuss with stakeholders from industry and society the future role of gaseous energy sources (fossil and renewable) up to 2030. The report, with initial findings, was presented by Federal Minister Altmaier on 9 October 2part of the energy supply system in the short and medium term.  3.3.i.7. Hydrogen technologies and alternative energy sources based on such technologies are an integral part of the energy transition and contribute to its success. For some areas of application, for example in air and sea transport or industries with process-related emissions, direct supply exclusively with electricity will not be view, hydrogen will therefore be another key element that will be indispensable for the successful sources currently still in use will be needed. In an industrialised nation such as Germany, gaseous and liquid energy sources remain an integral part of the energy system in the long term. Hydrogen (in the Federal e integration into the European energy supply infrastructure, carbon-in Germany and, if available, will also be used on a transitional basis) has a key role in driving forward and accomplishing the energy transition. For this reason, the Federal Government will adopt a national hydrogen strategy, to include a plan of measures to boost the market ramp-up of hydrogen technologies.  Measures to eliminate or mitigate the potential impact of a disruption in the natural gas supply  made for the necessary national frameworks and entitlements for companies and authorities to take appropriate precautions in the event that the supply situation deteriorates and to ensure the necessary cooperation of all the parties involved and the availability of the relevant resources. Alongside the aforementioned Energy Industry Act, the legal basis for crisis and emergency planning within Germany comprises the following national laws.  99  3.3.i.8. Energy Security Act  Natural gas The tools enshrined in the Energy Security Act in combination with the Regulation on the Security of the Gas Supply in a Crisis apply in an emergency in order to cover critical demand for natural gas in the event that the supply of natural gas is directly at risk or disrupted and the risk or disruption cannot be eliminated using market-based instruments, cannot be eliminated in good time using such instruments or can only be eliminated using disproportionate means. The need to perform public tasks and the international obligations enshrined in the Energy Security Act are also regarded as critically important. The instruments enshrined in the Energy Security Act come into effect when the Federal Government confirms (by means of a legislative In order to achieve the above objectives in the event of an emergency, a legislative regulation can be enacted pursuant to §1(1) of the Energy Security Act with provisions on the following:   -over, purchase, use and maximum prices of gaseous fuels    accounting, documentation and reporting obligations concerning the    Pursuant to paragraph 3, the legislative regulation can -over, purchase or use of goods in terms of time, place or quantity, or the limitation of such activities to    The term of these legislative regulations may not exceed 6 months. It may only be extended with the   The Regulation on the Security of the Gas Supply was enacted on the basis of the Energy Security Act. Whereas the Energy Industry Act serves as a statutory basis in particular for market-based instruments and measures carried out by gas supply companies within Germany, the Energy Security Act and the Regulation on the Security of the Gas Supply serve as a basis for sovereign powers of intervention.  3.3.i.9. Regulation on the Security of the Gas Supply in a Crisis Pursuant to the Energy Security Act (i.e. only in an emergency), the Regulation on the Security of the Gas Supply regulates the transfer of gas load sharing tasks to the competent state authorities. If the Federal Government enacts a legislative instrument confirming the presence of an emergency pursuant to the Energy Security Act, the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railways (as the federal load balancer) may enact decrees and intervene in the market if this is necessary to protect supra-regional interests, to balance the concerns of the electricity and gas industry or to regulate the use of gas storage reservoirs and other gas supply systems of supra-regional importance. The federal states can enact similar decrees provided that intervention on their part will not result in supra-regional impacts. Since a large-scale supply bottleneck is likely to have supra-regional impacts, the Federal Network Agency for Electricity, Gas, Telecommunications, Post and Railways will play a key role as federal load balancer in the event of an emergency. Under §1 of the Regulation on the Security of the Gas Supply in a Crisis, load balancers can enact decrees which make it mandatory for consumers and for companies and enterprises which generate, purchase or release gas to agree to the amendment of contracts or the conclusion of contracts with certain substantive provisions within a certain deadline in the event that the necessary behaviour cannot be achieved or cannot be achieved in good time through the application of existing contracts. These decrees are sovereign measures which are determined in advance and are not market-based. The decree must stipulate the usual fee for a service or (in the absence of any such fee) an appropriate fee. The same applies to the remaining contractual conditions. Load balancers may only enact such decrees if they are absolutely vital in order to eliminate or mitigate a risk to or disruption of critical gas supplies.  3.3.i.10. Potential measures under the decrees enacted pursuant to §1 of the Regulation on the Security of the Gas Supply Decrees pursuant to §1 of the Regulation on the Security of the Gas Supply may relate, for example, to the following measures and orders: increased withdrawals from gas storage facilities, the substitution of natural gas with petroleum, the substitution of natural gas with other fuels, the use of electricity not generated using gas, restrictions on the production of electricity in gas power plants, an increase in the production of natural gas, special arrangements for the heating of public buildings, restrictions on cross-border flows of gas, orders to use stocks of alternative fuels and additional orders to end consumers, bulk consumers or industrial customers.  3.3.i.11. Solidarity Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply introduced a solidarity mechanism between Member States for the first time, with the aim of significantly increasing the resilience of the European gas system. This solidarity mechanism represents a last resort to be used in the event of a far-reaching and severe shortage of gas in Europe. It makes it possible for the impacts of an acute 100  emergency to be spread out more evenly within the EU and mitigated. In order to ensure that the capacity of the Member States to take action in a crisis is safeguarded as effectively as possible, bilateral agreements will be concluded between the Member States which are directly connected to each other, regulating the technical, legal and financial framework for the supply of gas under the solidarity mechanism. Germany is working as a matter of priority to determine the precise nature of gas supplies under the solidarity mechanism and the associated compensation scheme. Development of the solidarity mechanism requires close cooperation between the Member States, in particular within the framework of the Gas Coordination Group. basic principles will be reached.  3.3.i.12. Emergency Plan for Gas The aforementioned measures to eliminate or mitigate the potential impact of a disruption in the natural gas supply within the meaning of Article 10 of Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 are described in the Federal  8 and 10 of Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply (previously Articles 4 and 10 of Regulation (EU) No 994/2010); within the plan, measures are assigned to three crisis levels (early warning, alert and emergency). The choice of level depends on the severity of the disruption, the expected economic and technical impacts and the urgency of the need to eliminate the disruption at national level. The entry into force of Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply (previously Regulation (EU) No 994/2010) will entail certain amendments to the national emergency plan and the above-mentioned national provisions.  Petroleum  The Energy Security Act, the Petroleum Stockholding Act and the Petroleum Data Act represent the main legal basis for oil crisis preparedness.  3.3.i.13. Energy Security Act  Petroleum Among many other topics, the scope of the Energy Security Act covers petroleum and petroleum products. Under this Act, legislative regulations can be enacted with provisions on the production, transport, storage, distribution and supply of fuels, including petroleum. In particular, measures which restrict consumption such as speed restrictions or bans on driving can be imposed, up to and including potential rationing of petroleum supplies. The first and priority option for handling disruptions to the oil supply which cannot be compensated for by the market participants alone (at least in the short term) is the approval of oil stocks under the Petroleum Stockholding Act. Measures such as speed restrictions and (partial) bans on driving would only be considered in connection with extremely severe and prolonged supply crises.  3.3.i.14. Petroleum Stockholding Act A statutory obligation to maintain stocks of petroleum and petroleum products has applied in Germany since leum imports, with the aim of safeguarding the energy supply at least against short-term interruptions in the flow of imports. It has been amended several times since then, inter alia in response to EU legislation and international developments. The Petroleum Stockholding Act comprehensively regulates the holding of petroleum and petroleum product stocks for the purpose of crisis preparedness. The Petroleum Stockholding Association was set up on the basis of this Act as a federal corporation under public law based in Hamburg, and assigned the task of building up stocks. It holds petroleum stocks of crude oil, petrol, diesel, extra-light fuel oil and the fuel JET A-1 which are adequate to cover 90 days of net imports. In the event of a supply crisis, the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy is to enact a regulation approving use of the stocks by the Petroleum Stockholding Association in order to compensate for the shortfall.  3.3.i.15. Petroleum Data Act The Petroleum Data Act serves as a legal basis for collecting petroleum data from all the major companies supply and for measures in the event of a crisis. To this end, the Federal Office for Economic Affairs and Export Control collects petroleum data (on imports and exports, stocks and domestic sales of crude oil and petroleum products) on a monthly basis from companies subject to a reporting obligation. The data collected (in particular information on current developments on the German oil market) are used for national and international crisis preparedness.  3.3.i.16. Transport Services Act A requirement for transport capacities may arise in the event of a severe oil supply crisis if the Federal Government (pursuant to the Energy Security Act) identifies a disruption in the supply of energy which cannot be eliminated using market-based instruments, cannot be eliminated in good time using such instruments or can only be eliminated using disproportionate means. the meaning of §7 of the Transport Services Act, the Federal Office for Economic Affairs and Export Control 101  is responsible for commissioning transport services within the portfolio of the Federal Ministry of Economic crisis.  3.3.i.17. Fuel Supply Restrictions Regulation The Fuel Supply Restrictions Regulation regulates the possible rationing of fuels using ration coupons. The Energy Security Act and confirmation by the Federal Government that the energy supply is subject to disruption provide the legal basis for related measures.  3.3.i.18. Fuel Oil Supply Restrictions Regulation The Fuel Oil Supply Restrictions Regulation regulates the potential rationing of light fuel oil on the basis of a reference quantity taken from a previous period. The Energy Security Act and confirmation by the Federal Government that the energy supply is subject to disruption provide the legal basis for related measures.  3.3.i.19. Petroleum Equalisation Regulation The Petroleum Equalisation Regulation makes provision for fair sharing between oversupplied and undersupplied companies in the petroleum industry. The aim is to preserve market structures insofar as possible and ensure that petroleum can be sold at market prices. The Regulation can also be used (on a mutatis mutandis International Energy Programme. The Energy Security Act and confirmation by the Federal Government that the energy supply is subject to disruption provide the legal basis for related measures.  3.3.i.20. Petroleum Management Regulation The Petroleum Management Regulation regulates the possible rationing of fuels and their production, distribution and use in the interest of the general public and of the Federal Armed Forces and allied armed forces on the basis of the Economic Security Act in the cases covered by Article 80a of the Basic Law. The ultima ratio principle applies in this area too.  3.3.i.21. National Emergency Strategy Organisation (NESO) authorities, institutions and companies that would work proactively in the event of an oil crisis to evaluate its impact and decide on the nature of response measures and arrangements for their implementation. The success of a NESO relies on close cooperation between the public and private sector, including the associations which represent private-sector players. The Council and the Supply Coordination Group in the performance of their tasks, and maintains contact with the IEA (alongside the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy and in consultation with the latter). The NESO manual contains crisis management guidelines and has recently been revised.  Electricity  In Germany, a number of stakeholders and all of the electricity supply undertakings are responsible for supplying the general public with electricity; they each hold individual responsibility for fulfilling this task. The main stakeholders are briefly outlined below, followed by a description of the measures taken in the electricity sector:   Transmission system operators: Transmission system operators operate systems which are used to transport electricity through an integrated maximum-voltage or high-voltage grid, including cross-border interconnectors (see §3(10) and (32) of the Energy Industry Act).   Distribution system operator  electricity: Distribution system operators distribute electricity, i.e. transport electricity at high, medium or low voltage (see §3(3) and (37) of the Energy Industry Act).   Balancing group manager  electricity: The balancing group manager is responsible for achieving a balance between injections and removals within a balancing group in each 15-minute period and, as the interface between system users and transmission system operators also assumes financial responsibility for any discrepancies between injections and removals within a balancing group (see §4(2) of the Electricity Network Access Regulation).  The transmission and distribution system operators play a key role in this area, since secure and reliable systems are a prerequisite for the supply of electricity. Pursuant to §13 and §14 of the Energy Industry Act, they must take appropriate measures to guarantee the security and reliability of the electricity supply system. System operators must work closely together with each other in order to comply with their supply obligations.  Measures to maintain and (where applicable) improve the  102   A functioning Electricity Market 2.0 based on free price formation will automatically guarantee that the correct es to guarantee the adequacy and flexibility of the energy system simultaneously create stronger incentives for market players to safeguard their electricity supplies (see Section 3.4.3.ii.). This makes it possible for the electricity market itself to refinance any additional capacities it needs. Joint measures must furthermore be taken within Europe to guarantee security of supply. The Federal Government also takes additional steps with a view to the maintenance and further improvement of gas supply security.  3.3.i.22. Operation of energy supply systems Pursuant to §11 of the Energy Industry Act, operators of energy supply networks are obliged to operate a secure, reliable and high-performance energy supply network on a non-discriminatory basis, and to maintain this network, optimise it as required, strengthen it and expand it insofar as economically feasible.  3.3.i.23. Provision of information Pursuant to §12(2) of the Energy Industry Act, transmission system operators must provide operators of other systems (with which their own transmission systems are connected in technical terms) with the necessary information to guarantee secure and efficient operation, coordinated expansion and interconnection.  3.3.i.24. Network reserve Pursuant to §13d of the Energy Industry Act, transmission system operators must keep in reserve resources to guarantee the security and reliability of the electricity supply system, and in particular for the management of grid congestion, voltage maintenance and restoration of the supply (network reserve). In winter 2019/2020, the network reserve volume is 6.6 GW.  3.3.i.25. Capacity reserve Pursuant to §13e of the Energy Industry Act, the transmission system operators maintain reserve power in order to compensate for net output deficits in the event that the security or reliability of the electricity supply system is at risk or disrupted as a result of the incomplete balancing of supply and demand on the electricity Netzregelverbund] (capacity reserve). For the first delivery period, from October 2020 to September 2022, it has a volume of 2 GW.  3.3.i.26. Monitoring of electricity supply security The Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy carries out ongoing monitoring of security of supply. Monitoring covers inter alia supply and demand on the European electricity markets and systems. A large number of scenarios are modelled, reflecting different supply and demand situations in the EU Member States and the associated cross-border exchange of electricity. This makes it possible to build up a realistic picture of the security of supply in Germany, taking into account its close integration into the European electricity system. In order to monitor the level of security of supply, it is necessary to gain a realistic idea of the contribution made by cross-border exchanges of electricity, inter alia in times of crisis. Standards are therefore currently being developed in Europe which outline how the level of security of supply should be calculated in order to capture all effects appropriate July 2019 applies the standards already in force in the country. Germany also participates in drafting of the Regional Report on the Security of Supply as a member of the Pentalateral Energy Form (see Section 3.3.ii., 3.4.), which is also based on these standards.  3.3.i.27. Monitoring of load management Under §51a of the Energy Industry Act, the regulatory authorities can undertake monitoring of the contribution of load management to the security of supply. For this purpose, the regulatory authorities can request from companies and associations of companies that have an annual electricity consumption in excess of 50 gigawatt hours information which may be required in order to analyse the current and future contribution of load management to security of supply in the electricity markets. The results of the first load management monitoring process, using data from 2017, show that significant potential for voluntary, market-based load reduction has been opened up among industrial sectors, but is still unused. This developed, but unused, potential of flexible enterprise locations amounts to about 2.5 GW (definite potential) to approx. 4.5 GW (probable potential). This potential has not yet been exploited because the current wholesale prices on the electricity market do not incentivise their use.  3.3.i.28. Overall strategy regarding system reliability and grid stability security of the grid-the Act on the Digitalisation of the Energy Transition.  Measures to eliminate or mitigate the potential impact of a disruption in the electricity supply  103  The rules and measures in the gas sector referred to above in relation to a disruption in the gas supply apply in a very similar way to the electricity sector. Firstly, the transmission system operators are authorised pursuant to §13 of the Energy Industry Act to take network-related and market-related measures and to use the network reserve and capacity reserve to eliminate risks or disruptions in the electricity supply system. If these instruments are inadequate, the transmission system operators are authorised and obliged as a next step to adjust all electricity feed-ins, electricity transits and electricity withdrawals. If these steps are again inadequate and there is a risk of disruption to the energy supply which jeopardises coverage of the critical demand for energy, the instruments under the Energy Security Act and accompanying regulations come into effect.  3.3.i.29. Energy Security Act  Electricity The Energy Security Act sets out the measures that should be taken in the event of an acute energy crisis, and is aimed at eliminating supply disruptions, initiating countermeasures and maintaining the power supply. It covers all forms and sources of energy. The Energy Security Act contains a detailed framework which serves as a basis for the enactment of legislative regulations. Section 1 of the Energy Security Act authorises the enactment of legislative regulations containing provisions on measures which may need to be taken to secure critical demand for energy in the event that imports of petroleum, petroleum products, natural gas or electrical energy are at risk or disrupted. The Regulation on the Security of the Electricity Supply was enacted on the basis of the Energy Security Act for the electricity sector.  3.3.i.30. Regulation on the Security of the Electricity Supply The Regulation on the Security of the Electricity Supply puts the provisions of the Energy Security Act into concrete form for the electricity sector. It authorises load balancers to take measures at all stages of the energy industry value creation chain in the event of a crisis. They can enact decrees targeted at consumers with provisions concerning the allocation, consumption and use of electrical energy, as well as a ban on consuming electrical energy. Although the Regulation on the Security of the Electricity Supply is in force, it can only be applied if a separate legislative regulation is enacted confirming that the energy supply is at risk or subject to disruption and that the Regulation on the Security of the Electricity Supply should be applied.  3.3.i.31. Electricity Effort Sharing Regulation and General Administrative Provisions on the Electricity Effort Sharing Regulation Special rules can be applied during the build-up to or in the event of armed conflict in order to eliminate or mitigate the impacts of disruption to the power supply. If the Bundestag confirms that a situation of armed conflict is imminent or present or grants particular consent to such a measure, the Federal Government can enact a regulation regulating the supply of electricity for defence purposes on the basis of the Economic Security Act. The Electricity Effort Sharing Regulation was enacted on the basis of the Economic Security Act. The purpose of the Electricity Effort Sharing Regulation is to maintain the supply of electricity using state management measures during the build-up to or in the event of armed conflict. Pursuant to the General Administrative Provision adopted in relation to the Electricity Effort Sharing Regulation, it covers the whole spectrum of generation, distribution and use of electricity. As in the case of the Regulation on the Security of the Electricity Supply, the Electricity Effort Sharing Regulation cannot be put immediately into effect. The need for its application must be confirmed by means of a further statutory instrument. Both the Electricity Effort Sharing Regulation and the Regulation on the Security of the Electricity Supply authorise load balancers to take measures at all levels of the energy industry value creation chain.  3.3.i.32. Measures in the event of a generation deficit Pursuant to the Energy Security Act, the transmission system operators must notify the Federal Network Agency immediately if there is a risk that a generation deficit may occur. In cases of this kind, the Federal Government can enact a statutory instrument stating that a crisis is present in accordance with the Energy Security Act, and assign the Federal Network Agency (the national load dispatcher pursuant to the Regulation on the Security of the Electricity Supply) the task of issuing orders to cover critical demand for electricity, for example by means of power outages or the privileged supply of vital facilities.  3.3.i.33. Stress testing In the coalition agreement, the Federal Government announced that it would carry out regular stress tests to check developments in network congestion as a basis for identifying any action that needs to be taken in the interests of security of supply (see Section 3.4.).  3.3.ii. Regional cooperation in this area  Natural gas 3.3.ii.1. Solidarity between EU Member States on the basis of the SoS Regulation (Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938) Regional structures will play a larger role in crisis preparedness in future, alongside national structures. The provisions of the amended SoS Regulation introduce for the first time the concept of solidarity between the 104  goal is to develop a solidarity mechanism which makes it possible to provide rapid and effective support to any Member States affected by a gas supply crisis. At the same time, the use of market-based measures to overcome a gas crisis is to be stepped up with a view to fully leveraging the potential available in terms of voluntary demand-side responses by market participants. A robust compensation scheme is to be developed in order to provide planning security and transparency for the Member States seeking solidarity and the market players affected. Germany views detailed exchanges of information with neighbouring countries as a priority in the development of this solidarity mechanism in order to ensure that the requirements arising under the individual national legislative frameworks can be identified and taken into account.  3.3.ii.2. Gas Coordination Group Within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938, the Gas Coordination Group serves as a platform for all topics relating to security of supply. It is to be activated in the event of any disruption to the supply of natural gas.  3.3.ii.3. Consultations on the preventive action plan and emergency plan Within the framework of crisis preparedness under Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938, it will be necessary in future not only to produce national risk analyses, but also to draft the above-mentioned national preventive action plans for risk preparedness and national emergency plans for risk preparedness. Consultations on these plans will be held with the competent authorities of all neighbouring EU Member States, as well as Italy, Sweden, Switzerland and Slovakia.  3.3.ii.4. Risk groups Since the entry into force of Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply, the Member States have been obliged to add a regional section to their national preventive action plans and emergency plans. These sections are drafted   3.3.ii.5. Pentalateral Gas Forum Since 2009, the five countries of Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, France and Germany have exchanged information on issues relating to security of the gas supply and other current gas-related matters. Several years ago, the Netherlands announced that it intended to cut funding for low-caloric gases. Exports of low-caloric to Belgium, France and Germany will consequently drop. This advance warning allowed France, Belgium and Germany to initiate adjustments in their market areas by converting gas appliances to run on higher-caloric gas. The countries in question exchange progress updates on market adjustments in their market areas within the framework of the Pentalateral Gas Forum.  3.3.ii.6. Cooperation in regional groups within the framework of the Trans-European Energy Networks (TEN-E Regional Groups)  gas Germany is regarded as an affected Member State for four primary energy infrastructure corridors for electricity and therefore belongs to the corresponding TEN-E Regional Groups. These include the Baltic Energy Market Interconnection Plan (BEMIP) for Gas (which should not be confused with the BEMIP Cooperation Forum described in Section 1.4.), North South Interconnection (NSI) East Gas and NSI West Gas, and the Southern Gas Corridor.  Petroleum  the European Union and the supra-national International Energy Agency (IEA). The relevant petroleum stockholding organisations are integrated into the work of the corresponding EU and IEA working groups.  3.3.ii.7. Cooperation in regional groups within the framework of the Trans-European Energy Networks (TEN-E Regional Groups)  oil The TEN-E Regional Groups include an energy infrastructure corridor for oil (Oil Supply Connections in Central Eastern Europe, OSC), in which Germany is involved as a member.  3.3.ii.8. Annual Coordinating Meeting of Entity Stockholders (ACOMES) Petroleum stockholding associations are organised under ACOMES. They exchange information annually on specific technical topics and new developments.  Electricity  In the future, crisis preparedness will focus increasingly on regional as well as national structures. In accordance with the regulation on risk preparedness in the electricity sector which entered into force on 4 July 2019, provisions are to be adopted at EU level for the first time to help the EU Member States work together  2.3.i.). 105   3.3.ii.9. Cross-border investigation of the security of supply with reference to the electricity market  The fact that the individual electricity markets are strongly coupled to each other means that security of supply must be examined on a cross-border basis. Country-specific considerations would not give an accurate picture of the true security of supply. Reliability of supply should be assessed on the basis of probabilities. The Federal Government plans to develop its approach to security of supply monitoring using probability-based methodologies. This approach involves stipulating a target level in order to assess the real security of supply and determine any measures required. Further details in this respect can be found in Section 3.4.  3.3.ii.10. Pentalateral Energy Forum  security of the electricity supply Since 2015, the transmission system operators in the countries which belong to the Pentalateral Energy Forum have published regular joint reports on the security of the electricity supply in the region. The methodology followed is the same as that for the national report (see above) and the European Mid-Term Adequacy Forecast. In 2018, the Member States also carried out a first joint crisis exercise involving the transmission system operators, the regulatory authorities and the ministries in the region. The aim of this exercise was to prepare the Member States for closer cooperation within the meaning of the proposed regulation on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector. Further details in this respect can be found in Section 3.4.  3.3.iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds   The electricity grids, together with the reserves such as capacity reserve and network reserve or the security stand-by, make a significant contribution to security of the energy supply. The electricity and reserves are financed through the network charges.  In the gas sector, the security of supply is ensured by modern and well-developed transmission systems (see Chapter 2.4.2.)