2.4.3.ii.    2.4. Internal energy market dimension 2.4.1. Electricity interconnectivity an electricity market. A larger market area for electricity and a higher level of liquidity in this market mean that fluctuating wind and solar feed-ins can be compensated for more easily, accurately and cost-effectively by means of flexible generators and consumers throughout Europe. A large and liquid European market area of this kind is a vitally important supply. Another important task is to overcome the structural challenge posed by the geographical distance that often separates -effective locations for electricity generation and its load centres for electricity consumption.  Grid expansion is a crucially important step in ensuring that electricity can be traded at any time between all EU Member States. Member States can only rely on electricity from neighbouring countries or purchase their electricity and hence make their national energy systems more efficient if electricity is in fact exchanged on the basis of balance sheet trading. By allowing traded electricity to be distributed to the Member States, grid expansion therefore represents the backbone of the internal European electricity market. For this reason, Germany intends to make substantial investments in national and cross-border grid expansion.  push forward with the growth of renewables in future, thereby making a Germany to Austria or from Denmark to Italy, for example. Germany faces particularly thorny challenges in connection with grid expansion, but the Federal Government is taking decisive action to overcome these challenges.  2.4.1.i. Level of electricity interconnectivity that the Member State aims for in 2030 in consideration of the electricity interconnection target for 2030 of at least 15%, with a strategy with the level from 2021 onwards defined in close cooperation with affected Member States, taking into account the 2020 interconnection target of 10% and the following indicators of the urgency of action 1. The difference in wholesale prices between Member States, regions or bidding zones exceeds the guideline threshold of EUR 2/MWh. 2. The nominal transmission capacity of interconnections is below 30% of peak load. 3. The nominal transmission capacity of interconnections is below 30% of installed renewables capacity.  Each new interconnector shall be subject to a socioeconomic and environmental cost-benefit analysis and implemented only if the potential benefits outweigh the costs  The Federal Government supports the new provisions on interconnectivity and the development of additional interconnectors with other Member States in the interests of a functioning internal European electricity market. In Germany, new interconnectors are currently either under construction or at very advanced planning stages and will be put into operation between 2020 and 2022. Further interconnectors will also be examined as part of network development planning. As such, no other country in Europe will increase its cross-border transport capacity by 2030 to the same extent as Germany.  Germany welcomes the fact that the interconnection target is now being operationalised through the specified criteria (indicators) because, as such, differences between the Member States in terms of geography and energy mix can be better taken into consideration. The three differentiated indicators serve a vitally important role as the basis for decisions on further interconnector expansion pursuant to Article 4(d)(1)-(3) of the Governance Regulation. The Federal Government believes that only by implementing the specifically planned interconnectors and those under construction will the criteria (indicators) be met, enabling Germany to achieve the interconnection target. This applies in particular to transmission capacity as a share of peak load and installed renewables generation capacity.  54  On account of the new provisions of Articles 14 to 16 of the EU Electricity Market Regulation, and in view of the interconnection target, it is also now important to better synchronise the development of additional interconnectors with the expansion of the corresponding national grids. Germany is therefore now regularly conducting the prescribed socioeconomic and ecological cost-benefit analysis for new interconnectors as part of network development planning.   2.4.2. Energy transmission infrastructure The transmission system operators (pursuant to §12b of the Energy Industry Act for electricity and §15a of the Energy Industry Act for gas) produce new network development plans (NDPs) on a regular basis; these plans cover the expansion of electricity and gas transmission infrastructures. The network development plans for electricity and gas are produced within the framework of a multi-stage process in which the transmission system operators and the Federal Network Agency (as regulatory authority) play an important role.   2.4.2.i. Key electricity and gas transmission infrastructure projects and, where relevant, modernisation projects that are necessary for the achievement of objectives and targets under the five dimensions of the energy union strategy   2.4.2.i. and 2.4.2.ii. have been consolidated.  2.4.2.ii. Where applicable, main infrastructure projects envisaged other than projects of common interest (PCIs)   Electricity transmission infrastructure  Germany is aware of the significance of national grid expansion for the functioning electricity market. The Federal Government is therefore firmly committed to the task of grid expansion. In December 2019, the 2019-2030 Network Development Plan was confirmed by the Federal Network Agency, illustrating the transmission system expansion required by 2030. The related investments in the expansion, reinforcement and optimisation of the transmission systems are investments in the internal European electricity market and in Europe as a business hub. The time involved in implementing large-scale investment plans of this kind is significant, however. In order to reduce grid congestion, the Federal Government is therefore working on an action plan for reducing grid congestion within the framework of the Electricity Market Regulation, which contains grid-related measures as well as measures relating to generation and re-dispatching (see Section 3.4.3.i.)  Based on past network development plans, the urgent requirement for 65 projects with a total of approx. 7 700 kilometres of cables, around 900 km of which relates to interconnectors, has already been enshrined in law in the Federal Requirements Planning Act and the Energy Line Expansion Act (see below). Germany will amend the Federal Requirements Planning Act in 2020 in light of confirmation of the 2019-2030 Network Development Plan. The goal of expanding the use of renewable energies to account for a 65% share by 2030 as well as the opening up of the interconnectors, as provided for in the European energy package, will form the basis of this. The planned phase-out of coal will also be taken into consideration. In addition to the grid expansion projects already set out in the Federal Requirements Planning Act and the Energy Line Expansion Act, further grid expansion projects with a length of just under 3 600 km, including new interconnector projects, are required by 2030 in accordance with the 2019-2030 Network Development Plan.  In legislative terms, grid expansion covering a total length of approximately 1 800 km was enshrined in law back in 2009 in the Energy Line Expansion Act.  On the basis of previous NDPs, grid expansion covering a total length of approximately 5 800 km was given the legal go-ahead in the Federal Requirements Planning Act. The status of projects under the Federal Requirements Planning Act and the Energy Line Expansion Act after the fourth quarter of 2019 was as follows:   Expansion goals under the Federal Requirements Planning Act: total length of around 5 800 km; around 700 km (12% of total) currently approved; around 370 km (6%) implemented. 16 of the 43 projects involve multiple federal states or multiple countries. Of the 43 projects under the Federal Requirements Planning Act, 9 are PCI projects (No 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 29, 30, 32, 33).  Expansion goals under the Energy Line Expansion Act: total length of around 1 800 km; around 1 400 km (77% of total) currently approved; around 910 km (50%) implemented. Project No 1 under the Energy Line Expansion Act is also a PCI project. 55   Against this backdrop, the 2018 coalition agreement provides for a stepping up of efforts in relation to expansion of the electricity networks. The Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy drew up an ambitious set of measures known as the Electricity Grid Action Plan which it presented in summer 2018. They include not only measures to accelerate grid expansion, but also measures for improved utilisation and optimisation of the existing grid. The Transmission System Expansion Acceleration Act was therefore amended and simplified in 2019. Regular, transparent and realistic monitoring is crucially important for the timely implementation of all grid expansion projects under the NDP. The quarterly monitoring reports published by the Federal Network Agency were enhanced on an ongoing basis and supplemented with predictive controlling.  Gas transmission infrastructure  During the preparation of the 2020-2030 Gas NDP, the transmission system operators (TSOs) set out a scenario framework for consultation on 17 June 2019. The Federal Network Agency made a decision on the scenario framework on 5 December 2019. As a result of this confirmation, the TSOs are now drawing up the 2020-gas infrastructure as well as the market area merger planned for 1 October 2021.  The gas demand scenarios and gas-related final energy demand were considered on the basis of the dena-TM95 and EUCO30 scenarios. The focus of dena--out of coal, as recommended by the Commission on Growth, Structural Change and Employment, is depicted in both scenarios. Both scenarios show an increase in hydrogen demand in the transport sector. The Federal Government is not adopting the scenarios as its own.  The scenario framework also contains details as to how the TSOs wish to depict the merger of the two German gas market areas planned for 1 October 2021 in the 2020-2030 Gas NDP. Transferring the present capacity level from the two separate market areas into the future joint market area is not straightforward. In particular because of the low exchange capacity between the two present market areas there is likely to be congestion in the future, limiting the amount of firm capacity. The TSOs have therefore developed a calculation system for identifying potential congestion in the entire German market area by looking at numerous load cases. They should also be able to weigh up whether the emerging congestion could be rectified more efficiently through investments in the network infrastructure or through the use of market-based instruments. No decision will be taken, in the gas network development planning process, on the appropriate design of the instruments from a regulatory and legal standpoint or on any possible approval of costs. In this context, the instruments are simply deemed to be surety for load cases which cannot be handled with the existing infrastructure.  The completion of the process for the current 2018-2028 Gas NDP meant that a basis was created for the expansion of the natural gas infrastructure in line with demand. The NDP, which is binding upon TSOs, contains 155 measures with a total investment volume of around EUR 6.9 billion, which are to be implemented by 2028. This involves:   the construction of new gas pipelines with a length of 1,364 km, and   the creation of additional compressor capacity of 499 MW.  The completion of the process for the upcoming 2020-2030 Gas NDP will result in further expansion measures.  The transmission system operators are also planning to convert individual natural gas pipelines into hydrogen pipelines and construct new hydrogen pipelines. Hydrogen infrastructure is currently not covered by regulations and is also not part of binding network development planning. However, the Gas NDP could serve as a transparency platform for the further development of the hydrogen infrastructure. The Federal Government has set out requirements for an expansion of the hydrogen infrastructure in its climate package.   2.4.3. Market integration 2.4.3.i. National objectives related to other aspects of the internal energy market such as increasing system flexibility, in particular related to the promotion of competitively determined electricity prices in line with relevant sectoral law, market integration and coupling, aimed at increasing the tradeable capacity of existing interconnectors, smart grids, aggregation, demand response, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, and real-time price signals, including a timeframe for when the objectives shall be met   56  2.4.3.ii. Where applicable, national objectives related to the non-discriminatory participation of renewable energy, demand response and storage, including via aggregation, in all energy markets including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met   2.4.3.iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to ensuring that consumers participate in the energy system and benefit from self-generation and new technologies, including smart meters   Subsections 2.4.3.i., 2.4.3.ii. and 2.4.3.iii. have been consolidated.  A large and liquid market area for the efficient balancing of generation and consumption  In order to guarantee the reliability and cost-effectiveness of the power supply while also integrating an increasing share of renewables into the electricity system, Germany has opted for an energy-only market and a single German bidding zone. A large market area makes it possible to use geographic balancing effects during generation and consumption. A high level of liquidity in the electricity market makes it possible to consolidate supply and demand flexibly and efficiently, even when electricity is generated on a fluctuating basis (as in the case of renewables). It also reduces the power of major providers to determine market outcomes and allows innovative players to enter the market. Uniform wholesale prices ensure that the most cost-effective generation technologies gain an appropriate share of the electricity mix, regardless of their location within Germany. Facilities with the lowest input costs are used on a supra-regional basis. This reduces the variable costs of the system as a whole. A single German bidding zone and a large European electricity market area reduce total demand for generation capacity, load management and storage facilities. This leads to a drop in the investment and maintenance costs of the overall system. The Federal Government believes that that a single European electricity market and the associated grid expansion is the best way to guarantee a cost-effective power supply. Creating local price signals is risky since it might distort the merit order effect, which ensures that the most cost-effective power plants at national level are the first to produce s such as the construction of decentralised power plants) can reduce grid congestion.  A single German bidding zone and a large European electricity market area reduce total demand for generation capacity, load management and storage facilities. Against this backdrop, exchanges of electricity between the EU Member States are gaining in importance. Supra-regional generation and consumption synergies can be harnessed to make the electricity system even more flexible. European capacities can also provide a joint basis for security of supply. Both reduce the overall costs of electricity generation in Europe.  Sectoral coupling for electricity, heating, industry and transport  The Federal Government plans to press ahead with sectoral coupling, or in other words the efficient use of electricity from renewable energies. As a result of sectoral coupling, electricity from renewables will play an increasingly important role in the buildings, transport and industry sectors and contribute to their decarbonisation. The framework conditions for sectoral coupling should therefore be improved in these sectors with a view to creating a level playing field for the various sectoral coupling technologies.  Gradual reduction and phase-out of coal-fired power generation  The Energy reduction and phase-out of coal-fired power generation, the Federal Government set up a commission which s climate goals in the energy sector, phasing out coal-fired power generation and supporting structural change (Commission on Growth, Structural Change and Employment, see Sections 3.1.1. and 3.4.3).   Increased coupling of the electricity markets  Increastowards implementation of the energy union and European market integration. Pointers are provided by d for day-ahead and intra-day trading, with associated guidelines for capacity allocation and congestion management.  Reduction of grid congestion  The new EU Electricity Market Regulation 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council states that Member States should take appropriate measures in order to address grid congestion. Member States with internal structural congestion may decide themselves how to rectify internal congestion. They may choose whether to address it through an action plan for reducing grid congestion or to review and, where 57  applicable, adjust their bidding zone.  construction of the major high-voltage DC transmission lines has been completed (and possibly beyond). This is due in part to the fact that new wind farms are mainly located in the north and east of Germany whilst some of the large load centres are located in the south and west of Germany. At the same time, some of the power plants in Germany will be taken offline in the future as a result of the nuclear power phase-out.  Germany is also a hub for international trading in electricity on account of its geographical position between the Scandinavian electricity markets (with comparatively low prices) and the western or southern European countries (with comparatively high prices). This is why Germany frequently exports electricity to its southern neighbours on a market-driven basis.  The provisions of the new EU Electricity Market Regulation 2019/943 on trading in electricity state that the interconnectors should be open for cross-border trade. Internal grid congestion and loop flows will in future only be taken into consideration to a very limited extent in the context of capacity allocation. A target of 70% of line capacity is to be made available to cross-border trade. Member States with structural internal congestion, which develop an action plan, will receive transitional arrangements. They must achieve the 70% target by the end of 2025 based on a linear trajectory. The new, stricter provisions on trading in electricity set out in the new EU Electricity Market Regulation will increase transmission demand.  In order to address the resulting challenges, the Federal Government plans to reduce grid congestion and the associated re-dispatching quantities to an acceptable level and increase utilisation of the electricity grids (see Section 3.4.3).  2.4.3.iv. National objectives with regard to ensuring electricity system adequacy, as well as for the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met  Guaranteeing adequacy   2.0 and jointly guarantee reliability of supply within Europe. Within Germany, security of supply is guaranteed by the Electricity Market 2.0. The latter makes it possible for the necessary capacities to be refinanced via market mechanisms. This relates not only to price peaks, but also to the long-term price signals sent by an intact Electricity Market 2.0. Two conditions must be met in order for the refinancing of power plants, flexible demand and other flexibility options to function correctly under the Electricity Market 2.0: the first of these is that electricity prices must continue to be formed freely on the market, and the second is that electricity suppliers must be subject to robust incentives to meet their supply obligations, and to financial penalties if they do not. The Electricity Market 2.0 is more cost-effective than an electricity supply system which involves an additional capacity market, since the latter creates superfluous overcapacities. In addition, the cheapest solutions to the problem of integrating renewable energies will prevail under the conditions of market competition. The Electricity Market 2.0 is safeguarded by a capacity reserve. By way of contrast to a capacity market, the capacity reserve only covers power plants which are not present on the electricity market and do not distort competition and price formation. Security of supply monitoring offers an additional safeguard.  Reliability of supply can be guaranteed on the basis of joint European capacities. In a large and liquid European market area, synergies can be leveraged between different locations with different production conditions. This makes it possible to respond efficiently to fluctuations in generation and consumption, reducing total electricity production costs and demand for capacity. In order for this to happen, however, reliability of supply must be examined at EU level rather than merely at national level, with a view to ensuring that the shared internal market can provide adequate capacities even in the event of a shortage, and that electricity can in fact be transported across borders.  Guaranteeing flexibility  Developments such as the integration of renewables into the electricity market and increasing electrification of other sectors require flexibility on both the demand and supply side in order to compensate for the fluctuating supply of wind and solar electricity in Europe and Germany. The Federal Government has set itself the goal of building a flexible electricity system consisting of well-developed electricity networks and flexible power plants and consumers. Storage facilities will also be integrated into this system wherever expedient. % makes the need for flexibility in the electricity masector to almost 50% in 2030.  58  2.4.3.v. Where applicable, national objectives to protect energy consumers and improve the competitiveness of the retail energy sector   Healthy competition exists in Germany among providers in the end energy customer sector. The Federal market. Competitive price formation and market liberalisation represent the key foundations for achieving this goal. The legislative framework for the protection of domestic customers will be developed further by the Federal Government in any area where this appears necessary. For example, there are plans to reinforce electricity (still at the consultation stage). Further details on the protection of energy consumers and competitiveness of the end customer market can be found in Section 3.4.3.iv.    2.4.4. Energy poverty 2.4.4.i. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to energy poverty including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met  Affordability of energy in the context of the energy transition is a priority for Germany. Affordability is furthermore one of the triad of goals which Germany has set itself in connection with the energy transition (see Section 1.1.). The Federal Government is therefore working to ensure that this affordability is guaranteed for all citizens. Energy costs can, essentially, also be positively influenced, for example, through a change of supplier, energy-saving behaviour and energy efficiency measures.  The Federal Government follows a comprehensive approach within the framework of social legislation and does not restrict itself to individual aspects of poverty. In Germany, vulnerable individuals have a constitutionally guaranteed right to a guaranteed minimum subsistence level fit for human beings (Article 1(1) of the Basic Law in conjunction with the social state principle pursuant to Article 20(1) of the Basic Law). This includes material needs essential to physical existence and a minimum level of integration in social, cultural and political life. In accordance with the provisions of the Federal Constitutional Court, the guaranteed minimum subsistence level fit for human beings is ensured through permanent legal rights (as part of basic income for jobseekers in accordance with Volume II of the Social Code and social assistance in accordance with Volume XII of the Social Code; so-called minimum guaranteed income schemes). These benefit entitlements for guaranteeing a livelihood are designed so that they always cover all needs required to ensure subsistence. As subjective rights, they are enforceable and subject to judicial review. The extent of these entitlements is set by the legislature based on requirement types and the funds required for them. An energy requirement essentially forms part of the minimum subsistence level fit for human beings. It is covered in the aforementioned minimum guaranteed income schemes as follows:   Reasonable costs for heating energy (including the production of hot water as part of a centralised heating energy supply) are covered in full (cf. §22(1) of Volume II of the Social Code and §35(4) of Volume XII of the Social Code).   Household energy (excluding decentralised production of hot water) is taken into consideration as part -rate basis (cf. §20(1) of Volume II of the Social Code households in the lowest income groups which, not exclusively, receive subsistence benefits in accordance with Volume II of the Social Code and Volume XII of the Social Code (based on special analyses of the Income and Consumption Sample Survey). In order to ensuwhenever a new Income and Consumption Sample Survey is conducted and, during the years in between, is updated using a mixed index (rate of change of the price de% and rate of change of net wages and salaries at a proportion of 30%). This means that eso updated annually.   An additional requirement is recognised for the decentralised production of hot water (cf. §21(7) of Volume II of the Social Code and §30(7) of Volume XII of the Social Code).  The group of people specifically entitled to claim is determined in accordance with individual aspects, whereby the minimum subsistence level defined by the legislature is compared with the relevant income and financial situation of the individual seeking assistance. The abstract definition of a group of people 59  guaranteed minimum subsistence level. The at-risk-of-poverty rate and the primary indicators suggested by the EU Energy Poverty Observatory are statistical values. They do not provide any information about individual need.  Supply disconnections on account of payment arrears on the part of the customer are essentially possible only under strict conditions in Germany, which are set out for the electricity sector in §19(2) of the Ordinance on the Default Supply of Electricity and for the gas sector in §19(2) of the Ordinance on the Default Supply of Gas. As such, the default supplier may disconnect the electricity supply only if the customer is in arrears of at least EUR 100 following the deduction of any advance payments and is unable to demonstrate that there is a good chance that they will fulfil their payment obligations. When calculating the outstanding payments, any debts which are not legally enforceable which the customer has objected to in due form, in due time and showing conclusive justification are not taken into consideration. In addition, any arrears which, on account of an agreement between the supplier and the customer, are not yet due for payment or which result from a disputed price increase by the default supplier which has not yet been legally decided on are also not taken into consideration. §19(2)(2) of the Ordinance on the Default Supply of Electricity also sets out a proportionality test. In this context, special circumstances (for example infants in the household or a need for a permanent electricity supply for medical reasons) may be taken into consideration, regardless of the time of year. Corresponding regulations also apply to the disconnection of the default gas supply, however with the difference that disconnections are possible without any consideration of a minimum amount with which the customer is in arrears.  A warning period of 4 weeks must be provided before the supply is disconnected. Only a small proportion of warnings actually result in the supply being disconnected. Figures from the Monitoring Report by the Federal Network Agency show that in 2018 only just under 6% of households supplied with electricity and around 3% of households supplied with gas which received a warning that the supply could be disconnected actually had their supply disconnected. This therefore means that around 0.6% of households supplied with electricity and around 0.2% of households supplied with gas actually had their supply disconnected. In the majority of cases, the problem that had led to the disconnection warning was dealt with beforehand. In 2018, the total number of disconnections fell in comparison to the previous year. For urgent cases resulting from the fact that a customer is in arrears, the German social system also boasts a wide range of support options to prevent the supply from actually being disconnected:   Where the payment obligations for energy costs cannot be met and the energy supply has been disconnected or the supplier has issued a warning stating that it might disconnect the supply, loans or, as an exception, non-repayable grants may be considered (cf. §24(1)(22) and §22(8) of Volume II of the Social Code; §37(1) and §36(1) of Volume XII of the Social Code). Where applicable, old debts (payment obligations which were already due before the subsistence benefits were approved) may even be covered if, otherwise, an emergency situation comparable to homelessness would arise.   Support for energy costs is also available for individuals who otherwise receive no subsistence benefits (cf. §21 second sentence of Volume XII of the Social Code in conjunction with §36(1) of Volume XII of the Social Code).   Ultimately, the competent authority can pay basic income for jobseekers and social assistance benefits directly to the energy supplier in order to prevent any risk of the supply being disconnected beforehand (cf. §24(2) and §22(7) of Volume II of the Social Code; §35(1) of Volume XII of the Social Code).  As illustrated, energy law and social law in Germany already provide an extensive framework whose purpose is to prevent social hardship in relation to supply disconnections as far as possible. A study published at the end of November he and Energy, also came to this conclusion. Existing funding programmes and consumer advisory services (including consulting on energy saving) are also useful measures for preventing supply disconnections. One such advisory service is the Energy Savings Check  energy consulting which low-income households can access free of charge. Firstly, the Energy Savings Check includes tips on how to reduce energy consumption. Secondly, households also receive helpful technical devices free of charge such as energy-saving and LED bulbs, switchable power strips, TV standby cut-off switches, time switches and tap aerators, which can help to reduce energy consumption and related costs