2.3. Energy security dimension 50  2.3.i. The elements set out in of Article 4(c)  Reliability of the energy supply is one of the triad of energy transition goals (see Figure A1). In qualitative terms, this means ensuring that Germany can meet domestic demand for energy from any sector at all times. No quantitative goals have been set in this respect. As a basic principle, however, the goals described in Section 2.1. and 2.2. (and the relevant measures set out in Section 3.3.) have a stabilising effect on reliability of supply, since domestic renewables production and improved energy efficiency will reduce demand for sources of energy which are characterised by limited availability and are primarily imported (over 70% of f energy).  The European Union has established a detailed framework with a view to overcoming limitations and disruptions in the energy supply and carries out ongoing work to develop it further. This framework determines  event of a crisis. Such a crisis might involve a disruption in the supply of either petroleum or gas and electricity. The main requirements concerning reliability of supply are set out in the Energy Industry Act.  Natural gas  Natural gas continues to represent a significant portion of the energy supply in Germany and the European Union as a whole. A major supply disruption could therefore affect both Germany and the EU as a whole and cause significant damage. Resilience to supply crises should therefore be maintained and where necessary increased in order to reduce yet further the likelihood of such crises and increase preparedness for a deterioration in the supply situation. Responsibility for security of the grid-based supply is primarily held by the undertakings active on the market in Germany. All gas supply undertakings operating in Germany must comply with clearly defined public service obligations in terms of supplying the public (and vulnerable customers in particular):   Pursuant to §§1 and 2 of the Energy Industry Act, they are obliged to guarantee to the general public a supply of gas which is as reliable, cost-effective, consumer-friendly, efficient and environmentally sound as possible.  Pursuant to §15 of the Energy Industry Act, transmission system operators (TSOs) must guarantee the stability of the network. The tools referred to in §16 of the Energy Industry Act can be used for this purpose.  Pursuant to §53a of the Energy Industry Act, gas supply undertakings must continue to supply natural gas   As a basic principle, the undertakings (in particular the TSOs and operators of gas distribution networks) are therefore responsible for eliminating any hazards or disruptions by means of network-related and market-related measures. This also includes the key issues paper approved in winter 2015 by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy, which strengthens gas supply security by means of market-based, EU-compliant, cost-effective and flexible measures in the balancing energy market. In consultation with the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy, every year in the summer the TSOs and market area coordinators set a volume to be tendered for the coming winter and the tendering methods for long-term options (LTOs) and demand side management (DSM). Depending on how the winter plays out, a so-called short-term balancing product can be added at a later date. In order to guarantee the best possible level of preparedness and prevent or mitigate the impact of gas supply disruptions, the competent authorities also produce preventive action plans and emergency plans for individual risk groups after consulting the stakeholders. Provision for these plans is made in Articles 8, 9 and 10 of Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply (previously: Articles 4, 5 and 10 of Regulation (EU) No 994/2010). The plans are designed in such a way that national risks can be overcome by leveraging the full benefits of regional cooperation. The technical and operational nature of the plans means that they are suitable for preventing the occurrence or deterioration of an emergency, limiting its consequences and taking into account the security of the electricity systems. Further details can be found in Section 3.3. on measures and strategies.  Petroleum  -national International Energy Agency (IEA). Germany must comply with requirements in this respect imposed by both the EU and the IEA; these provisions are combined and transposed into national law in the Petroleum Stockholding Act and the Petroleum Data Act. Within Germany, these pieces of legislation form the legal basis for large-scale stockholding of petroleum and petroleum products for the purpose of crisis preparedness. In accordance with their provisions, Germany holds petroleum stocks of crude oil, petrol, diesel, extra-light fuel oil and the fuel JET A-1 which are adequate to cover 90 days of net imports. The 51  Petroleum Stockholding Association, which is a corporation under public law, ensures that these petroleum stocks are held properly. In the event of a supply crisis, the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Industry, the Federal Office for Economic Affairs and Export Control and the Petroleum Stockholding Association, including the Supply Coordination Group (a group which brings together representatives of the petroleum industry) will work together on the basis of the established procedures to approve release of the Petroleum   Electricity  of reliability of supply (Council of European Energy Regulators   geographical market as a whole.  Ensuring a secure supply of electricity, even under the conditions of the energy transition, is a key objective for the Federal Government. This applies in particular in view of the almost simultaneous phase-out of nuclear energy and coal. We want to ensure that we maintain security of supply at its current high level in each phase of this fundamental transformation.  The energy transition and the phase-out of nuclear energy and of coal-fired power generation present Germany with major challenges. The switch to renewable energies means, firstly, that wind power from the north needs to be transported to the centres of consumption in the south. The optimisation and increased utilisation of existing electricity grids and above all the rapid expansion of the electricity grids are therefore extremely important. Secondly, the supply of electricity must also be secured even if wind farms and photovoltaic systems are able to supply only a small amount of electricity due to weather conditions. Therefore, in addition to power generation from renewable energies, Germany also needs to optimise and expand the grids, consistently develop the electricity market further at EU level, adopt approaches offering greater flexibility on the demand side and finally have gas power plants and storage reservoirs which can respond flexibly to the level of wind and solar power generation available. Load management may also play an important role for electricity consumers as it minimises so-called peak loads when many customers demand electricity at the same time.  The Electricity Market f balancing supply and demand, even in times of scarcity, therefore guaranteeing the reliability of the electricity supply. Cross-border exchanges of electricity (through integration into the European electricity markets) will also help boost urity of supply. The capacities required will mainly be refinanced via market mechanisms. It will be a capacity reserve, rather than a capacity market, that provides additional back-up for the Electricity Market 2.0 (see also Section 2.4.3.ii.). As in the gas and oil sector, the primary responsibility for guaranteeing the security of supply in the electricity sector in Germany rests with the undertakings which operate on the market. The following requirements must be met by undertakings:   Pursuant to §§1 and 2 of the Energy Industry Act, they are obliged to guarantee to the general public a supply of electricity which is as reliable, cost-effective, consumer-friendly, efficient and environmentally sound as possible.   Pursuant to §13 of the Energy Industry Act, the transmission system operators hold responsibility at system level. The system-related and market-related measures referred to in §13 of the Energy Industry Act can be used for this purpose.   Pursuant to §14 of the Energy Industry Act, the operators of electricity distribution systems can use the same measures as the operators of transmission systems. They must also take steps (as and when requested to do so) to support operators of other transmission systems or upstream operators of electricity distribution networks into whose networks they are integrated.  Requirements imposed at EU level in the field of risk preparedness are also playing an increasing role in the electricity sector. On 22 May European Council approved the Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector, repealing Directive 2005/89/EC  COM (2016) 862. The aim of this Regulation is to improve cooperation between the Member States in the area of crisis preparedness, limit the impacts of electricity supply crises in the EU, establish procedures for mutual support between Member States and increase transparency in respect of crisis preparedness. The Regulation came into effect on 4 July 2019.  Coal  There is a functioning international market for hard coal. Lignite is a domestic energy source in Germany. On 52  the basis of recommendations from a national commission on the role of coal as a source of energy for the generation of electricity, the Federal Government has presented the legislature with a Coal Phase-out bill, in which the gradual phase-out of coal-fired power generation by no later than 2038 is to be enshrined in law (see Section 3.4.3.). Section 3.3. on measures relating to security of supply therefore contains no details on coal as a source of energy.  2.3.ii. National objectives with regard to increasing the diversification of energy sources and supply from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems  Government. It continuously monitors energy supply trends and publishes its findings in monitoring reports pursuant to §51 of the Energy Industry Act. According to these reports, the supply of electricity in Germany is based on a relatively broad mix of power generation sources, which effectively minimises the risk of a supply bottleneck affecting individual energy sources.  gas industry is undertaking significant efforts to expand the natural gas infrastructure (lines and reservoirs) in line with demand and adapt it to the changing market environment as well as diversify the natural gas supply yet further for the purposes of security of supply and foreseeable exploitation of fields in the North Sea. As such, there are advanced plans for the creation of a German LNG import infrastructure in Brunsbüttel, Stade and Wilhelmshaven. The commissioning of German LNG terminals will expand and strengthen the already  routes. At the same time, the natural gas industry will decide in the German and European liberalised gas market on the sources of supply of its natural gas imports. The extent to which and under what conditions the LNG infrastructure will be able to gain importance in the future for the importation of hydrogen remains to be seen.  Natural gas/petroleum  The number of natural gas import routes into the German market is comparatively high. Adjacent markets can also procure gas via different routes. This reduces the risk of supply disruptions, not only in the German market but also in neighbouring markets. Cross-border flows of gas are exchanged with all neighbouring countries, and some of the gas supplied from Russia and Norway is transported directly via pipelines which do not network and the LNG import infrastructure of the neighbouring countries of Belgium, France, the Netherlands rk of oil pipelines is adequately secured. The oil supply complies with market criteria. There is no need for state regulation. The natural gas and petroleum industry ensures that supply structures are adequately diversified and takes precautions to maintain this level of diversification.  Coal  secure. Imports of hard coal are widely diversified. Given the liquid global market and international supply structures, the security of supply for hard coal is regarded as high. In accordance with the recommendations of the Commission on Growth, Structural Change and Employment, the generation of electricity from lignite and hard coal will be continuously reduced so that the capacity of the power plants on the market in 2022 is approximately 15 GW for lignite and 15 GW for hard coal, maximum 9 GW for lignite and 8 GW for hard coal by 2030 and zero GW by the end of 2038 at the latest.  Electricity  An increase in interconnectivity is planned in the electricity sector (ratio of cross-border capacities to national peak load). The 2030 target for interconnectivity (thermal interconnector capacity) is 30%. Further details on this topic can be found in Section 2.4.  2.3.iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to reducing energy import dependency from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems   The Federal Government undertakes ongoing efforts to guarantee energy supply (see Section 2.3.i. for further details in this respect).  2.3.iv. National objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular by means of deploying domestic energy sources, demand response and energy storage  As already noted in Section 2.1.2., the Federal Government is aiming for a continuous increase in the share of renewables in gross final energy consumption and in the electricity, heating and cooling and transport 53  sectors. The national goals are set out in this section. Developments such as the integration of renewables into the electricity market and the increasing electrification of other sectors require flexibility on both the demand and supply sides in order to compensate for the fluctuating supply of wind and solar electricity in Europe and Germany. Further details in this respect are provided in Section 2.4.3.ii