3.5. Research, innovation and competitiveness dimension 3.5.i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in Section 2.5.  The Federal Government revises the relevant regulatory legislation on an ongoing basis in order to create a suitable regulatory foundation which makes it possible to bring innovative energy technologies to the market successfully. It also supports the transfer of research and market preparation through targeted funding measures.  Research  3.5.i.1. Seventh Energy Research Programme of the Federal Government 119  The Seventh Energy Research Programme of the Federal Government was adopted by the Federal Cabinet in September 2018. It lays the foundation for the energy research activities carried out by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy, the Federal Ministry of Education and Research and the Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture. The Seventh Energy Research Programme is the outcome of a comprehensive upstream consultation process with stakeholders in the fields of science, economy and civil society. The Seventh Energy Research Programme covers five main topics:   The energy transition in various consumption sectors: buildings and districts, industry, trade,    Energy generation: Wind and solar energy are the stand-out examples in this area, but other regenerative power generation technologies and low-emission thermal power plants also play a key role.   System integration: the focus in this area is on networks, storage reservoirs and sectoral coupling as a new area of research. Within the framework of the planned national hydrogen strategy, the Federal Government will also be focusing on energy research. The efficient and affordable storage of renewable energies is a crucial research objective.   Cross-system research topics: these include energy systems analysis, energy-relevant aspects of digitalisation, resource efficiency, carbon technologies and material research, as well as societal considerations.   Nuclear safety research must be viewed in the context of the nuclear power phase-out.  Particular importance is attached to improving and accelerating the transfer of technology and innovation. To -f research funding and financially strengthened. These projects are not only designed to be larger and to encompass more topics -value creation chains relating to key technologies for a low-emission energy system in Germany will be strengthened. Start-ups play a key role in transferring technology and innovation, and their access to research funding will therefore be maximised in future. Networking activities (in particular the Energy Research Networks) and the communication of research will also support the transfer of technology and innovation.  With a view to promoting networking at European and international level, the Seventh Energy Research Programme prioritises bilateral initiatives (particularly under Scientific and Technological Cooperation Agreements), well-established cooperation within Europe (SET Plan, EU framework programmes for research), cooperation under the IEA TCPs, cooperation with other international organisations, and cooperation under the international initiative Mission Innovation. Germany plans to continue its cooperation at international level in the field of nuclear safety research.  3.5.i.2. Avoidance of Climate-Relevant Process Emissions in Industry research initiative More than one third of industrial emissions  gas emissions  are caused by production processes in primary industry. A new research initiative is being enabled to research and develop processes and combinations of processes that contribute to the direct avoidance of greenhouse gases in key sectors such as iron and steel, cement and lime, chemicals and non-ferrous metals. In addition to the technological innovations, the funding guidelines also focus on economic conditions and the competitiveness of the methods developed, the optimisation of which is to be investigated by research.  3.5.i.3. Financial industry and climate protection At the core of this field of action is developing the expertise of a strong and effective research community in Germany in the subject area of finance and climate protection. Under the Federal Ministry of Education and examined, and specific subject areas and research questions identified in a joint process involving science, the real economy, the financial sector and politics. With the help of Federal Ministry of Education and Research funding, these issues will then be worked on in the medium to long term in broad-based research networks and concomitant networking and dialogue activities. The measure is to be implemented in several components staggered over time.  3.5.i.4. Climate Protection in Agriculture and Forestry research initiative The aim of the research initiative is to enhance the sink function of soils and forests, develop strategies for land degradation-neutral use of soil and land, and develop climate-friendly farms, equipment and chains of 120  production. On the basis of existing research findings, innovative, comprehensive and systemic approaches and ways of doing things are to be developed in regions and fields of action that have particularly high and sustainable potential to contribute to climate protection in an effective way and in line with other sustainability targets. Transdisciplinary approaches will be pursued. The main emphases are on the systemic examination of agricultural operations and chains of production, soil management (including enhancement of the sink function (carbon sequestration) and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, inter alia, when using fertiliser), forest, ACCESS for DPPN (plant-soil interactions to increase productivity and soil fertility, soil as a carbon sink), farming systems of the future, and the further development of sustainable dual and multiple use of land areas.  3.5.i.5. New Bioeconomy Strategy The aim is to develop sustainably produced, bio-based products and bio-based production methods inter alia through the substitution of fossil-based products and for the recycling / reuse (reprocessing) of consumer goods for new products (cascading use, circular economy). New measures include cutting-edge technologies for the industrial bioeconomy (biohybrid technologies: electrobiosynthesis and photobiosynthesis for carbon use), funding phase 3 of the Zero-CarbFP Alliance (use of high-carbon waste streams as a material for the production of functional biomass and for the manufacture or recovery of recyclable materials using biotechnological processes) and microbial biofactories (carbon use in biotechnology).  3.5.i.6.  experimental construction. Technical, architectural and organisational innovations for future-oriented and affordable construction will be trialled in practice, supporting their diffusion into general planning and construction practice. Funding will be offered for the implementation of sustainable, energy-efficient and affordable construction measures which apply technical, organisational or architectural innovations to address social challenges: energy transition, climate and environmental protection, conservation of resources, climate change impacts, demographic change, social participation. As a complement to the research initiative -asure, the model project looking at experimental construction will extend its examination to the entire lifecycle of buildings and to issues such as resource and spatial efficiency, sufficiency, generational fairness, and environmental and health protection.  3.5.i.7. - -of Economic Affairs and Energy and the Federal Ministry of Education and Research will be promoting the energy transition in buildings and urban neighbourhoods. The focus here is on the efficient, system-based energy supply of neighbourhoods across sectors on the basis of renewable energies. The flagship projects address existing, redeveloped and new-build areas. The initiative, launched in mid-2017, has a total funding volume of EUR 120 million.  3.5.i.8. Research and observation of aerosols, clouds and trace gases as part of the European research infrastructure ACTRIS A research partnership under the name ACTRIS is to be established at European level to research short-lived climate pollutants (SLCP) and airborne pollutants (including fine particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide). The main subject of the studies is the spatial and temporal distribution of these substances. The knowledge gained constitutes an important scientific basis for future policy decisions on measures in the areas of climate protection and air quality management. Measures relating to short-lived climate pollutants have the advantage that, because of the brief retention period of these greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, their impacts on the climate become apparent without significant delays. Use can be made of synergistic effects between climate protection and air quality management. Research institutions from 16 European countries have come together in ACTRIS. Germany is currently an observer. Numerous German research institutions are involved in the process. Closer networking of the leading European research institutions in the field of airborne pollutants and short-project as positive. The German research institutions involved in the process are characterised by a high level of scientific expertise.  Innovation and competitiveness  3.5.i.9. Further development of CCU/CCS options  Germany has already provided substantial amounts of funding for the further development of many different carbon capture and utilisation (CCU) research and development projects based on renewable energies. The 2-2-so plays an active role in the ERA-Net Cofund ACT (Accelerating CCS Technologies) initiative, which funds large-scale projects as well as projects along the entire process chain of CCS and CCU technologies, i.e. carbon separation, transport, storage and use. Germany does not currently operate carbon storage facilities for 121  research purposes. Germany is a founding member and chair of the PHOENIX Initiative, which is intended to increase carbon valorisation in a European context. The capture of carbon from the atmosphere (DAC) is attracting more attention and will be funded as a carbon technology under the Seventh Energy Research Programme.  3.5.i.10. Carbon avoidance and utilisation in primary industries programme The programme focuses on reducing emissions in primary industry.  Carbon Direct Avoidance (CDA): The programme includes measures for CO2 avoidance that will be implemented within a single project together with CCU / CCS and are therefore an integral part of a CCU / CCS measure. Innovative technologies that lead to a significant reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in primary industry will be incorporated into this programme.  Carbon Capture and Utilisation (CCU): Approaches and technologies aimed at facilitating efficient carbon cycle management are also part of the programme; this includes technologies to capture and use CO2 inter alia from the area of bioeconomy, but in particular also approaches that allow it to re-enter the circulation process after use.  Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS): The vast majority is vital for the achievement of greenhouse gas neutrality by 2050, because in the medium term it is a comparatively cheap option for reducing otherwise unavoidable process-related emissions created by primary industry. Many reduction strategies aimed at achieving the global temperature targets under the Paris Agreement also rely on what are known as negative emissions; the elements of the entire CCS process chain would also need to be available for this. A broad consortium comprising scientists, company representatives and representatives of NGOs has recently called for the prompt further development of CCS  accompanied by a discourse with the social stakeholders  to ensure the technology is available for these industries from 2030 (Acatech, September 2018); the deep substratum below the North Sea has extensive CO2 storage capacities. The programme is aimed at facilitating the modification and scaling of carbon capture methods to industrial systems, the modelling and where applicable development of regional, supra-regional and potentially European CO2 networks and standards for CO2 flows in transport, European cooperation on the storage of CO2 in the deep substratum below the North Sea, and a CCS dialogue process in the general context of carbon reduction technologies involving NGOs, associations, companies and the science fraternity. On the subject of CCS, please refer to the CCS report agreed by the Federal Government.  3.5.i.11. EU ETS Innovation Fund: further development of the NER300 programme Research and development measures: Within the framework of European emissions trading, the NER300 low-carbon demonstration projects in the energy sector, has been in existence since 2011. The funding budget is supplied through the sale of 300 million EU ETS certificates. Funding under the NER300 programme focuses on innovative renewable energy technologies and carbon capture and storage technology (CCS). The existing programme is being developed further. In the future it will also encompass the industrial sector and will now e low-carbon production processes with a demonstration character in the industrial sector, incl. carbon capture and utilisation (CCU), within the EU.  3.5.i.12. National decarbonisation programme  The measure is a funding programme in the area of development, demonstration and market launch. In order to reduce emissions in the industrial sector as far as possible, it is necessary to also substantially reduce or completely eliminate process-related GHG emissions that are unavoidable, or that can be avoided only with difficulty using current technology. For this purpose, key projects in the area of emission-intensive industries will be funded. These projects should address both applied R&D and the testing on an industrial scale and broad market introduction of mature technologies, and also consider their economic viability. The funding programme aims in particular to support the greatest possible reduction of GHG emissions in the production of emission-intensive goods, the optimisation of process chains, the conversion of processes to the use of renewable energy sources and raw materials, the substitution of emission-intensive goods, and technologies for the conversion of hydrogen and the use of CO2. The funding programme will be implemented by the Competence Centre on climate change mitigation in energy-intensive industries, based in Cottbus. The Competence Centre on climate change mitigation in energy-intensive industries also acts as a think tank and a multisectoral, international and interdisciplinary knowledge platform for the topic of industrial decarbonisation.  3.5.i.13.   122  In parallel to the Energy Research Programme, the SINTEG Programme is aimed at the development and demonstration of solutions to the technical, economic and regulatory challenges posed by the energy transition; over 300 enterprises and other stakeholders will be involved in five large model regions which are suitable for the mass market, innovative technologies, and market mechanisms for flexible and smart networks and markets. Digitalisation of the energy sector will be the main focus of attention. A further aim of the programme is to collect experiences from the field as a basis for future development of the legislative framework. This was the -Regulation, which entered into force on 21 June 2017. The Regulation provides SINTEG participants with the opportunity to try out new technologies, procedures and business models (e.g. those relating to digitalisation and sectoral coupling) without suffering any economic disadvantages.  3.5.i.14. Act on the Digitalisation of the Energy Transition Digitalisation is essential for achieving the climate protection goals. The Act on the Digitalisation of the Energy Transition provides the appropriate basis for cross-sectoral digitalisation. The further measures necessary for the implementation of this Act will be taken, principally the further development of the technical standards and the regulatory framework, for example for the better network integration of renewable energies and flexible loads.  3.5.i.15. Research and innovation agenda on the material use of carbon This measure relates to the use of carbon from industrial emissions as a raw material to support a carbon-e very heart of the chemical value creation chain. For example, the use of naphtha, obtained from petroleum, results in substantial CO2 emissions over the entire lifecycle. The efficient use of CO2 as a source of carbon in conjunction with renewable electricity can pave the way for a circular economy and significantly reduce the carbon footprint of industries and products. The research and innovation agenda is intended to bundle together promising research approaches, identify directions for future research ventures, and support avenues into industrial application.  3.5.i.16. Greater involvement of start-ups in energy research Reducing energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions requires moving away from existing technological pathways and developing new, innovative solutions. Start-ups often play a crucial role in the development of innovative ideas and solutions to problems. They are set to play a significant part in the success of the energy transition. However, up to now the conventional instruments and mechanisms of project funding have rarely been tailored to these players. The Federal Government therefore aims to better cater to start-ups with new and modified funding formats in the Seventh Energy Research Programme and to increase their participation in all subject areas of energy research. To achieve this, existing obstacles will be progressively removed: firstly, by expanding the content of the programme to include non-technical innovations (business models, new services) relating to new technical developments, and secondly, by adapting and speeding up the administrative procedures and introducing new, more agile project formats and --ups with innovative ideas for the energy transition will be provided with more straightforward avenues to start joint projects with partners from science and industry and will thus bring new impetus to energy research.  3.5.i.17.  These measures aim to develop expertise and technology along the battery value-creation chain  from the material manufacture and the manufacturing processes of cell and battery production to the battery systems for various applications (inter alia e-mobility, stationary electricity storage, etc.). The umbrella concept brings together all existing funding measures and programmes on battery research under one roof and builds on existing expertise from established locations throughout Germany. Implementation of the measures is intended to create sustainable structures to lay the foundations for battery cell production using both current concepts with liquid electrolytes and prospective concepts such as solid-state batteries or post-lithium era approaches. The focus of the research work is on increasing energy density and fast charging capability, security and lifespan, as well as aspects of the circular economy such as recycling and the substitution of critical or toxic raw materials. Top-of-the-range battery research activities and the number of battery researchers in Germany are to be increased. The findings will be validated and demonstrated on a large scale velop a one-of-a-kind innovation pipeline for the battery. Research into other battery concepts for use in stationary storage systems, such as redox flow batteries (e.g. on the basis of organic electrolytes) and their further development will also be funded.  3.5.i.18. Key areas of mobility: A) Urban mobility B) Systemic barriers to innovation in climate protection The development of sustainable and effective mobility concepts, linked to social and technological innovations on the basis of a systemic perspective. Effective starting points for decarbonisation are to be identified by analysing the interplay of mobility flows, infrastructure networks, value creation chains, urban and spatial planning, and individual and social requirements. The funding aims, on the one hand, at the development and 123  practical testing of climate-friendly mobility innovations, inter alia in real-life laboratories and (regulatory) experimental spaces. Secondly, it aims to create a solid basis for long-term innovation and transformation management. Two sub-measures:   urban mobility of people, and  systemic barriers to innovation for climate protection, linked to the results of the National Platform on Mobility (NPM).  3.5.i.19. Digital Innovation Hub for Climate Initiation and financing of a Digital Innovation Hub for Climate, focusing on forging connections between industry, science and politics. Strengthening application-oriented research & development in the field of climate protection through exchange on digital innovations and the use of digital technologies in climate protection and the development of business models.  3.5.i.20. Green ICT: research and development for reducing the carbon footprint of digital technologies The aim is to develop technological solutions to reduce the carbon consumption of digital technologies. There is already considerable potential for climate protection in reducing the energy consumption of information processing and information storage components such as processors or server farms (clouds) and the related communication technologies (ICT). New digital applications are currently emerging, particularly in the area of for data evaluation. In view of the rapidly growth in use of these technologies in the industrial sector, it is essential that technological solutions be developed to enhance the energy efficiency of ICT. There are joint initiatives with the European Union, for example with the European Processor Initiative (EPI), that need to be expanded.  3.5.ii. Where applicable, cooperation with other Member States in this area, including, where appropriate, information on how the SET Plan objectives and policies are being translated to a national context   European energy research cooperation  3.5.ii.1. Strategic Energy Technology Plan (EU SET Plan) Germany plays an active role in shaping the future of European energy research under the EU SET Plan. Its representatives participate in the thematic working groups within which strategies are defined for closer cooperation on various technologies. The outcomes of the relevant working groups feed into the selection and further development of national funding priorities and were taken into account in the Seventh Energy Research Programme. One of the main objectives of the SET Plan is the stepping up of cooperation with other Member States. The Energy Research Programme contains provisions intended to strengthen cooperation at European level, inter alia under the aegis of the SET Plan. The research areas of the SET Plan areas are being dealt with in European cooperation, partly on the basis applications are submitted to the relevant national funding bodies) and, where appropriate, through joint funding announcements. Cooperation of this kind has taken place in recent years with Finland, Austria, Switzerland, the Netherlands and Denmark in particular. For the period 2022-2030, consolidation of the funds and potentially a moderate growth is envisaged. In the relevant Council working groups, Germany is actively driving forward the realisation of implementation plans, developed as part of the SET Plan, relating to 12 technology fields. These are: Photovoltaics, CSP, offshore wind, geothermal energy, consumers, smart cities, energy systems, energy-efficient buildings, energy-efficient industry, batteries, renewable fuels and bioenergy, and CCUS.  3.5.ii.2. European Research Area (ERA-NET) Cofund The Federal Government is involved in several cooperation projects under ERA-NET Cofund, which is a Horizon 2020 funding instrument that supports partnerships between research institutions. The specific goal is the strategic coordination of national programmes, with a joint call for tenders serving as the basis for funding of transnational research or innovation projects. Cooperation projects are currently under way in the energy sector in the fields of geothermal energy, carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS), networks, and renewable energies (wind energy, photovoltaics, bioenergy).  Regional/bilateral cooperation  the following individual initiatives have been set up:  3.5.ii.3. Cooperation between the North Sea coastal states in the area of energy research The Federal Government is involved in cooperation between the North Sea coastal states in the area of energy research with a view to developing internationally accepted standards for the operation of test benches for research and development purposes, inter alia with a view to ensuring that field measurements can be 124  replaced (at least in part) by test bench measurements in the medium term.  3.5.ii.4. Cooperation on CCUS with other North Sea coastal states Within the framework of the North Sea Basin Task Force (NSBTF), Germany and the other North Sea coastal states investigate scientific, technical, legal, economic and political issues relating to CO2 storage below the North Sea and matters relating to the use of CO2. 3.5.ii.5. Greek/German Research Cooperation and Funding of Early-Stage Researchers Energy research is one of several pillars of research cooperation between Germany and Greece and has been / will be the subject of two consecutive bilateral funding announcements. Funding is awarded for projects focusing on the production, storage and efficient use of renewable energy, and the sustainable and efficient supply of heating and cooling.  3.5.ii.6. French/German Fellowship Programme  GRI) is a funding programme set up by the Federal Government in parallel to the French initiative of the same name. The aim of this programme is to give well-known researchers and promising early-stage researchers from abroad the opportunity to carry out research at German universities and research institutions. The initiative focuses not only on climate and earth systems research, but also on energy research. Five fellows with junior research groups are being funded.  3.5.ii.7. French-German research funding for sustainable energy supply in Europe  Further to a decision taken by the 19th German/French Ministerial Council, a bilateral funding announcement on energy conversion, storage reservoirs and Smart Grids was published in October 2018. Since October 2019, joint research projects have been developing innovations for an efficient, affordable and environmentally sound power supply based on renewable energies for France, Germany and Europe. These projects take a systemic approach not only to technical matters, but also to the economic and societal challenges associated with the energy transition in Europe.  3.5.iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds   Research  3.5.iii.1. Seventh Energy Research Programme The Seventh Energy Research Programme was adopted by the Federal Cabinet in 2018. Under the Seventh Energy Research Programme, the Federal Government is planning to make around EUR 6.4 billion in total available between 2018 and 2022 for research, development, demonstration and testing in the field of future-proof technologies and concepts. This represents an increase of around 45% compared to the previous period (2013-2017). For the period 2022-2030, it is planned that energy research will be stepped up.  3.5.iii.2.  Germany is more commit 2020. The Federal Government supports the involvement of German researchers in consortia and their applications for EU funding via the National Contact Point (NCP) for Energy. NCP information and advice campaigns help research and industry stakeholders to make appropriate use of the comprehensive and complex opportunities offered by Horizon 2020. In the interests of ensuring that ous energy and climate goals can be achieved, the range of topics covers not only basic research options, but also technology-oriented development topics and back-up measures for product launches and market share growth. The involvement of citizens (as consumers) and relevant socioeconomic aspects are also playing an increasingly important role in this respect.  Innovation and competitiveness  3.5.iii.3.  The Federal Government is planning to provide research funding and subsidies for energy storage exist to set up a new Fraunhofer Institute for Storage Technologies.  3.5.iii.4. New construction techniques and materials for a low-emission industry As part of the technology transfer programme for lightweight construction, the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy funds the material and industry sector-related transfer of technology and knowledge, having regard to closed cycles with a focus on material efficiency and carbon savings. This is to be funded technology transfer programme for lightweight construction. The resources provided by the Energy and Climate Fund complement the existing funding programme for lightweight construction. Within the scope of 125  the existing budget monies, supplementary funding will be provided for technology transfer and lightweight construction projects with policy priority and a degree of urgency in their timing which will directly result in significant carbon savings, and at the same time serve the purposes of energy efficiency and climate and environmental protection required under the Energy and Climate Fund Act. The production of basic materials is usually resource-intensive and energy-intensive. Using materials and resources efficiently can therefore not only open up enormous potential for savings and product improvements, but also significantly reduce climate and environmental impacts. The potential contribution of material and resource efficiency to achieving the Paris climate goals has hitherto been given too little attention in national and international climate strategies. If primary resources are not used at all, emissions and resource consumption will immediately be reduced. Recycling and circular, digitally interlinked and closely cooperating value creation chains also open up fresh perspectives and new dimensions for resource and material efficiency. If the associated potentials are to be exploited, designers are needed for new material- and resource-efficient products, processes and business models, as are product manufacturers who are able to incorporate these new scenarios into their product development processes. New design solutions for resource-efficient propulsion systems, system elements and equipment using multifunctional materials can substantially reduce the proportion of greenhouse gas emissions. Under this programme, approaches for a material-efficient and resource-efficient industrial sector are to be developed and implemented jointly with relevant companies and research institutions. The programme follows a holistic implementation strategy that, in addition to funding research and innovations, is also able to include the market introduction and dissemination of new technologies, and if required the provision of the necessary infrastructures. The funding focuses on:  Construction methods that use materials efficiently: A major driver for increasing material efficiency and resource efficiency is the use of innovative and weight-saving construction and manufacturing techniques. It is crucial that reducing greenhouse gases is factored in at the product design stage. A holistic approach, taking into account the idea of a lifecycle, is therefore vital for measures relating to material efficiency and resource efficiency. The objectives of a low-carbon and resource-efficient circular economy in the industrial sector are pursued in the sense of a lifecycle.  New materials: New materials enable usage that is precisely tailored to the relevant field of application. This means that resources can be saved and greenhouse gas emissions reduced. In addition, new materials offer the possibility of capturing and sequestrating CO2 in the long term. For example, high-quality biogenic carbon fibres could be produced by sequestration of carbon (making a dual contribution to climate protection through long-term sequestration of carbon and reducing weight and emissions). Here, too, managing the circulation cycle plays an important role.  3.5.iii.5. -  SMEs provide significant impetus for climate protection and energy efficiency. They are a central pillar for -Federal Ministry of Education and Research offers small and medium-sized companies (SMEs), as being in the vanguard of technological progress, the opportunity to successfully survive on the market with new products and processes relating to climate protection and energy efficiency. The funding initiative is used by SMEs across Germany. Given the growing importance of the issue of climate protection, in the revised version of the funding guidelines a specific reference has also been included to the Climate Action Plan 2050, in order to mobilise SMEs even more effectively in favour of this topic.   