3.2. Energy efficiency dimension Planned policies, measures and programmes to achieve the indicative national energy efficiency contributions for 2030 as well as other objectives referred to in Section 2.2, including planned measures and instruments (also of a financial nature) to promote the energy performance of buildings, in particular with regard to the following:  The national Energy Efficiency Strategy 2050 (EffSTRA), containing a mixture of tools and measures with far-reaching sectoral and cross-sectoral effects aimed of the achievement of the energy efficiency goals, has been developed and was adopted by the Federal Government on 18 December 2019. The energy efficiency-related measures of the Climate Action Programme 2030 (e.g. expansion of funding offers, carbon pricing) will play an important role in increasing energy efficiency by 2030. These measures are taken up in the updated National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP 2.0) as part of the EffSTRA. With the NEEAP 2.0, the energy efficiency measures are bundled, put into concrete terms and implemented. The EffSTRA also contains supplementary measures that are designed to effectively support efforts to tap into efficiency potentials. While the measures under the Climate Action Programme 2030 are aimed at tapping into large-scale waste minimisation potentials, the supporting measures of the EffSTRA are designed to address existing obstacles (e.g. information deficit, lack of motivation among the players involved, bureaucratic burden associated with financing) in tapping into areas with potential for greater efficiency. Many of the supporting measures use digital solutions to make it easier for consumers and energy consultants to access information and to create more transparency.   energy efficiency policy is based on a broad range of instruments across all sectors and reflects its belief in the importance of providing advice, information and funding, imposing demands and promoting research. The main measures currently being implemented are outlined in detail below.  3.2.i. Energy efficiency obligation schemes and alternative policy measures under Articles 7a and 7b and Article 20(6) of Directive 2012/27/EU, to be prepared in accordance with Annex III to this Regulation   In the first savings period (2014-2020), the Federal Government has implemented various strategic measures within the framework of a broader package in the interests of compliance with Article Efficiency Directive. This approach is also planned for the second savings period (2021-2030). Germany is planning measures to deliver final energy savings of 3 996.5 PJ or 95.46 Mtoe; these measures are appended to this National Energy and Climate Plan as an annex in accordance with Article 3(2)(h) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.  3.2.i.1. Energy Efficiency Strategy 2050 In its cross-sectoral Energy Efficiency Strategy 2050, the Federal Government defines key objectives and instruments for the development of its energy efficiency policy. With its 2050 efficiency strategy, the government sets out an energy efficiency target for 2030 and a package of measures to reduce primary veloping a long-term roadmap to halve primary energy consumption by 2050. Within the framework of this dialogue process, further energy efficiency measures are also to be developed for 2030 and 2050.  3.2.i.2. National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 2.0 (NEEAP 2.0) The NEEAP defines emergency measures and areas of ongoing work with a view to achieving the national efficiency and climate goals. The most important fields of action under the energy efficiency policy are as follows: promoting energy efficiency in the buildings sector and in industry, commerce, trade and services, establishing energy efficiency as an RoI and business model and increasing personal responsibility for energy 85  efficiency. The NEEAP measures have been reviewed and imported to the NEEAP 2.0 with a view to achieving the energy efficiency goals with an effective set of measures.  3.2.i.3.  demand must be substantially and perenewable energies must be used directly in all sectors and, thirdly, electricity from renewable sources must be used efficiently for heating, transport and industry within the framework of sectoral coupling. The main priority is to use technologies that use little electricity to replace as many fossil fuels as possible. At the same time, sectoral coupling presents challenges for electricity grids, especially at distribution network level; this also calls for grid expansion and reinforcement measures to safeguard the security of supply, at least in the ramp-up phase of e-mobility and heat pumps. The Efficiency First principle is therefore central to meeting this challenge and mitigating the increase in electricity demand. Limiting demand is necessary in order to ensure -contribution to the decarbonisation and security of supply dimensions. To ensure that the economically efficient measures from the area of energy efficiency are implemented as a matter of priority, the Federal Government is also pushing through the implementation of energy saving measures in all sectors, through a range of funding programmes and standards. These measures and funding programmes are presented in this chapter.  3.2.ii. Long-term renovation strategy to support the renovation of the national stock of residential and non-residential buildings, both public and private, including policies, measures and actions to stimulate cost-effective deep renovation and policies and actions to target the worst performing segments of the national building stock, in accordance with Article 2a of Directive 2010/31/EU   Under Article 2a of the EU Directive on the energy performance of buildings, the Federal Government must -Term is required to produce a roadmap setting out measures and domestically established, measurable progress indicators for achieving the long-term climate goals, and present methods and incentives for the renovation of the national building stock. Among its objectives the EU buildings directive lists the achievement of a highly energy efficient and decarbonised building stock, and the transformation of existing buildings into nearly zero-energy buildings in a cost-effective manner (EPBD, Directive (EU) 2018/844).  Essentially, the following applies for the buildings sector: in order to substantially reduce consumption of non-renewable primary energy, the demand for energy for heating and cooling must be significantly reduced through efficiency measures, and the share of renewable energies in covering the remaining demand must be increased significantly.  The Efficiency First principle will be pursued in the buildings sector. Measures such as insulation of the building envelope, installation of efficient windows or other facade elements, airtight building construction and the use of highly efficient technical systems for heating, cooling and lighting equipment and technology can enhance efficiency potentials. At the same time, however, there are both technical and economic limitations and impediments that need to be addressed with regard to other parameters such as behaviour and information transparency.  The use of renewable energies (e.g. solar thermal energy and photovoltaics, as well as biomass / biomethane within sustainably generated and available limits), heat sources (e.g. ambient heat, environmental heat, waste heat or wastewater heat) and, in the long term, hydrogen and its derivatives in sections of the heating market, will open up considerable renewable energy potentials enabling an increase in energy performance.  With the measures implemented to date aimed at achieving the energy and climate goals, significant progress has been made in climate protection and in energy efficiency, and between 1990 and 2019, greenhouse gas emissions  decoupled from economic growth  in the buildings sector have been reduced by around 42% to 122 million t CO2 (1990: 210 million t CO2). In the same period, the share of renewables in final energy consumption for heating and cooling was increased by around 12 percentage points to 14.4% in 2018. In the buildings sector, the current programmes, such as the CO2 Building Modernisation Programme, the Market Incentive Programme (MAP), the Energy Efficiency Incentive Programme (APEE) and the Heating Optimisation Programme, have provided tangible impetus to increasing energy efficiency and/or increasing the share of renewable energies in the buildings sector, which have contributed significantly to these favourable developments. However, scientific analyses show that to achieve the 2030 targets, these developments need to be accelerated. In order to make the necessary progress in the buildings sector in improving energy performance and reducing carbon emissions, the Climate Action Programme 2030 has approved a comprehensive package of measures aimed at increasing energy efficiency and using renewable energies in the buildings sector, along with measures in other sectors.  In principle, measures in the buildings sector are to be interlinked across all trades, creating synergies in such 86  a way that obstacles are addressed, funding measures are more broadly supported, the high quality of remedial measures is ensured and potentials for energy efficiency and use of renewable energies in buildings are considered jointly.  3.2.ii.1. Public relations work campaign, information will in future be more technical and more tightly targeted at specific audiences. For further information see Section 3.2.iv under Communication.  3.2.ii.2. Independent consultancy services provided by Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e. V. (vzbv) Initial and brief consultations are provided by the independent organisation Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e. V. (vzbv) and funded by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy. The federal funding for energy consulting services provided by these consumer advice centres is tailored to the various interests of private households. The consulting services provided throughout Germany are intended to eliminate bias and obstacles to energy renovations and the use of renewable energies. They are also a low-threshold introduction to buildings-focused consulting. The number of consulting sessions held across Germany each year is currently just under 140 000. They serve as a launchpad either for energy-related measures or for more in-depth consulting via the federal fundinbuildings (on-  3.2.ii.3. Federal funding for energy consulting for residential buildings (on-site consulting, individual renovation roadmap) The federal funding for energy consulting for residential buildings is targeted at owners of residential buildings associations). A qualified energy consultant inspects the entire property and draws up a comprehensive not only flags up energy-saving potentials, but also outlines options for using renewable energies, estimates the necessary investment costs and calculates the potential heating cost and carbon savings. Energy consulting thus helps incorporate energy efficiency and renewable energies into the planning and decision-making process, thus utilising the efficiency potentials when it is most advantageous to do so. As a result, building owners will be better informed about the added value provided by energy modernisation measures. Investments make the most sense when they are coupled with upcoming maintenance or modernisation measures. In particular, the energy consulting offered under the Climate Action Programme 2030 has been further boosted by the following measures:   subsidy (previously 60%)  Using modernisation recommendations obtained through a state-funded energy consultation to issue energy certification (energy performance certificate)  Addressing energy advice based on immission measurements by qualified chimney sweeps  Making use of other opportunities for qualified consulting (inter alia, heating system replacement, use of synergy effects with disabled access conversion or burglary protection).  3.2.ii.4. Energy consulting for non-residential buildings owned by municipalities/charitable organisations Since 2016, this measure has helped municipalities, majority-owned municipal companies and charitable organisations to carry out energy-related renovations of their building stock (including schools, kindergartens and administrative buildings) and to construct new energy-efficient buildings. Qualified and state-funded energy consultants provide the owners of these buildings with a comprehensive overview of where the most energy is wasted in their buildings, which investments make financial sense, the savings potentials of these residential buildings, will be further developed for municipal buildings. This will help municipalities (as public authorities) to meet their obligation to assume an exemplary role.  3.2.ii.5. Federal funding for energy consulting for SMEs Energy consulting for SMEs identifies energy-related weak spots in small and medium-sized enterprises, including in buildings; an on-site inspection is also performed (see also Section 3.2 iv.). The Federal Ministry funding programmes covering energy consulting for SMEs and energy consulting for non-residential buildings owned by municipalities / charitable organisations will be consolidated and brought into line, since enterprises and municipalities often have very similar consultancy needs. At the same time, this will give the leeway necessary to enable services to differentiate by specific target groups.  87  3.2.ii.6. National efficiency label for old heating installations The efficiency label scheme for old heating installations allows heating engineers (since 2016) and district chimney sweeps (since 2017) to award efficiency labels, on a gradual basis, starting with the oldest boilers. The aim of the measure is to increase the replacement rate for old heating installations by 20% (up to a rate of 3.7% a year) and provide an incentive for consumers to save energy by replacing their boiler. Around 13 million boilers will be awarded labels over a 7-year period.  3.2.ii.7. Buildings Energy Act  On 23 October 2019, the Federal Cabinet approved the draft for the New Buildings Energy Act submitted by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy and the Federal Ministry of the Interior. The New Buildings Energy Act creates a new, single, coordinated body of rules for the energy requirements for new buildings, for existing buildings and for the use of renewable energies for provision of heating and cooling in buildings. To this end, the bodies of rules governing energy efficiency in buildings and the use of heat from renewable energies, which are currently still separate, will be consolidated and unified. The New Buildings Energy Act fully implements the European requirements for the energy performance of buildings and integrates the provision on nearly zero-energy buildings into the unified energy conservation legislation. The current levels of performance for new buildings and renovation remain unchanged. To implement the measures relating to energy conservation legislation for buildings as approved in the key points for the Climate Action Programme 2030, a 2023 review of the energy requirements for new and existing buildings has been scheduled, a regulation has been presented on the installation of oil-fired heating systems as from 2026, and the provision of advice to the buyer or owner has been made a key element in the sale or major renovation of a one- or two-family house.  3.2.ii.8. 2 Building Modernisation Programme the field --related renovations and high-efficiency new-builds of residential and non-residential buildings, as well as individual renovation measures in the area of energy efficiency, with a view to implementing the long-term renovation strategy for buildings. It is the most generously funded instrument in the field of energy efficiency (programme volume for new commitments in 2020 is EUR 2.5 billion). Funding is offered in the form of low-interest loans, in some cases in conjunction with redemption subsidies or alternatively, investment grants; applications may be and cooperatives, property developers and businesses (e.g. also contracting providers), private and majority-owned municipal companies and municipalities and charitable organisations. In January 2020, in the CO2 Building Modernisation Programme implementing the Climate Action Programme 2030, the funding rates for renovations to residential and non-residential buildings and the funding quotas for high-quality energy-saving new-build projects in the housing sector were increased by 10 percentage points.  3.2.ii.9. Market incentive programme for renewable energies in the heating market The Market Incentive Programme provides funding for installations which use renewable energies to generate heating and cooling, as well as for certain heat storage facilities and local heat networks, both in residential and non-residential buildings. Almost all installations in existing buildings are eligible for funding, whereas installations in new buildings are only eligible in exceptional circumstances. The programme comprises two funding pillars. The Federal Office for Economic Affairs and Export Control awards investment grants for small installations. Solar thermal collectors, biomass systems, efficient heat pumps and, since January 2020, gas hybrid heating systems that incorporate a proportion of renewable energies are eligible for funding. Larger installations are eligible for Federal Government subsidies for the pro-rata redemption of low-interest KfW loans under the KfW programme Renewable Energies  Premium. Installations eligible under this pillar include large solar thermal systems, biomass heat or combined heat and power plants, large efficient heat pumps, biogas lines, deep geothermal systems, local heat networks for heat from renewable energies and large-scale storage facilities for heat from renewable energies. As of 1 January 2020, the Market Incentive Programme changed from the previous fixed-rate funding to a co-financing model, and the funding rates were increased by 10 percentage points in implementation of the Climate Action Programme 2030. To increase the replacement rate for oil-also integrated into the Federal Office for Economic Affairs and Export Control part of the Market Incentive Programme. The aim of this bonus is to provide an attractive incentive for all heating systems currently running on fuel oil to convert to renewable heating or efficient hybrid gas heating systems with some renewable energy inclusion.  3.2.ii.10. Energy Efficiency Incentive Programme The Energy Efficiency Incentive Programme provides additional funds to boost the funding under the Market Incentive Programme. The Energy Efficiency Incentive Programme also supports the market launch of stationary fuel cell heating systems in new and existing buildings. Funding for stationary fuel cell heating systems with an electrical output of 0.25-5.0 kW is available in the form of a subsidy under the KfW 88  -Efficient Construction and Renovation    3.2.ii.11. Funding programme for heating optimisation The aim of the programme is to incentivise the replacement of inefficient heating and hot water circulation pumps with high-efficiency pumps, and the optimisation of existing heating systems by means of hydraulic balancing. Funding is up to 30% of the net investment costs. The programme also serves as a gateway to more comprehensive energy efficiency measures in buildings.  3.2.ii.12. Federal funding for efficient buildings including investment grants as well as an oil heating system replacement bonus With the Federal funding for efficient buildings scheme, newly devised within the framework of the funding strategy (see also Section 3.2.v.iii.), the existing investment funding programmes in the buildings sector are to be packaged into a single, comprehensive and modernised funding offering and optimised in terms of content. This significantly increases the target user-friendliness and attractiveness of the funding, directs it even more towards more ambitious measures and greatly simplifies the application procedure. A single application will now suffice for the funding of efficiency measures and a transition to renewable energies for renovation or new-build projects. Within the framework of the Federal funding for efficient buildings scheme and the KfW funding, care will be taken to ensure that the investments of other users can be funded through the award of grants. Key points of the Federal funding for efficient buildings scheme include, in particular:   bigger rewards for renewable energy use bonuses  broad harmonisation of systemic funding of residential and non-residential buildings  parallel loan and subsidy funding across all sectors  greater consideration given to contracting models in funding  increased funding of digitalisation measures aimed at optimising operation and consumption  increased funding of sustainability requirements  improved interfaces to energy consulting.  3.2.ii.13. Tax incentives for energy-related building renovations As a key measure in the buildings sector, as from 1 January 2020 tax incentives for energy-related building renovations were introduced. The new instrument complements the existing funding set-up in the buildings sector and can be taken up as an alternative to the investment funding programmes. A deduction from the amount of tax payable ensures that as many residential building owners as possible benefit from the measure. Funding is provided for individual renovation measures to owner-occupied residential property where such measures are also considered eligible in the existing programmes offering funding for buildings. This includes individual measures such as in particular replacing heating systems, but also the installation of new windows or insulating roofs and external walls. 20% of the investment costs are eligible for funding; the funding is provided in the form of a deduction from the amount of tax payable, spread over a 3-year period.  3.2.ii.14. Funding of serial renovation work The Federal Government will also support the industrial prefabrication of facade and roof elements and standardised installation of systems technology, including the supply of self-generated electricity, in conjunction with new investment and contract models. The approaches to serial renovation developed within the framework of the model projects carried out will be put into practice with the help of a newly launched funding programme, with the objective of supporting the industrial prefabrication of facade and roof elements and standardised installation of systems technology, including the supply of self-generated electricity, in conjunction with new investment and contract models. This will ensure that buildings are renovated to a high standard and the renovation times are shortened.  3.2.ii.15. Energy-efficient urban redevelopment --efficient supply infrastructure (heating / cooling / water / wastewater) will be implemented at district level in terms of concept and investment. The programme provides impetus for greater energy efficiency in the municipal -e2020 new forms of assistance are to be developed and existing forms of assistance developed further. In the subsidy scheme, more attention is to be given in particular to environmentally friendly mobility concepts, inter-municipal approaches, measures relating to planning of heating networks in the designs and in the activity of renovation management, as well as concepts relating to mixed quarters (combination of new and existing buildings).  3.2.ii.16. Expansion of funding programmes for heating networks, heat storage systems and multi-building investments The Federal Government plans to create a new funding pillar bundling together funding programmes for 89  heating networks, heat storage facilities and cross-building investments which involve supplying buildings, plants or processes with heating or cooling from renewable energies (see also funding strategy in Section 3.2.viii.). Investment measures which involve supplying buildings, plants or processes with heating or cooling are currently eligible for funding under the Market Incentive Programme. These measures include heating and cooling networks and storage facilities powered by renewable energies, as well as larger installations for generating heat from renewable energies (e.g. deep geothermal systems, biomass heat plants). This measure also contributes to GHG reduction under Section 3.1.1. In addition, the existing funding  for construction of new district heating networks with a high share of renewable energy and waste heat, but in particular also to provide financial support for the transformation of large existing heat networks into low-temperature heat networks with a high share of renewable energies and waste heat.  3.2.ii.17. Further development of the innovative Future Building (Zukunft Bau) programme climate protection, energy and resource efficiency, affordable construction, quality of design in the context of (urban) construction, and the management of with demographic change. One focus here is on the accrual of knowledge and transfer of knowledge of technical, architectural and organisational innovations. The -friendly and environmentally-ssues relating to the environmental dimension of sustainable construction. The research topics range from regional, climate-neutral construction and land conservation to building with renewable raw materials and building concepts that dispense with fossil fuels and instead use exclusively renewable energy sources. Building construction should be understood as a recirculating system, from the production of components to demolition e, which serve both to help structures adapt to the consequences of climate change and also to reduce the complexity of construction.  3.2.ii.18. Building the Energy Transition (Energiewendebauen) initiative ndles together the widely varying topics of research funding in the buildings sector and serves to improve awareness of energy innovations through targeted Programme (see Chapter 3.5.i.1.) and in terms of content links up the research fields energy-optimised and climate-neutral buildings, energy transition at district level and supply of heating and cooling, thermal energy storage reservoirs and the funding initiative EnEff.Building.2050. As a research module, the Energy for flagship projects which demonstrate widely effective solutions for climate-neutral buildings and districts using innovative technology and concepts, thereby advancing their market launch or widespread implementation. Eligible projects focus on the development of individual key technologies and procedures in the construction of new buildings or the renovation of existing buildings, and may also include small research   3.2.ii.19. Exemplary role of federal buildings Government buildings must serve an exemplary function in the areas of energy efficiency, climate protection climate policy objectives can be implemented in line with an ethos of cost efficiency and functionality in construction projects. At an early stage, therefore, they will be given a standard that meets the objectives and will incorporate innovative technologies. Budgetary approval will be given according to the principle of economy with the fewest resources possible. As from 2022, new government buildings are required to comply with EH 40 as a minimum; analogous targets will be developed for special uses. In the short term, this objective will be laid down in a mandatory decree issued by the Federal Cabinet in respect of climate-neutral new government bexisting building stock for 2030 and 2050 will also be set down in binding form in this decree. This will require that, as from a yet to be specified deadline, at least an EH 55 standard will apply for all new major renovation and modernisation projects. Analogous targets need to be developed for special structures, and exceptions (protection of monuments etc.) taken into account. An annual remediation rate will be set in the decree, in order to achieve climate protection goals. Ideally, the measures aimed at achieving the climate protection goals in the existing stock are to be planned and carried out in close connection with larger renovation or replacement building measures that were coming up anyway for some other reason. This measure -neutral Federal   3.2.ii.20. Further development of the Urban Development Funding Programme The Urban Development Promotion Programme is the most successful instrument of the Federal and the federal states has supported cities and municipalities in correcting shortcomings in urban design, sustainably strengthening them as places to live and do business. At the same time, strategies for solutions addressing the challenges of climate change also need to be considered. As part of the further enhancement 90  of the Urban Development Promotion Programme 2020, measures to protect the climate and to adapt to climate change have therefore been more effectively addressed. In the future, these issues will be a mandatory condition for eligibility and at the same time will be eligible for funding in all sub-programmes of the Urban Development Promotion Programme. The funding can be used in particular to improve the green infrastructure, for example by creating, preserving or expanding green and open spaces, and to link up green spaces and open areas. But measures aimed at energy-related building renovations, unsealing soil, land recycling, climate-friendly mobility, use of climate-friendly building materials, greening of built-over areas or enhancing biodiversity are also eligible for funding. The further development of the Urban Development Promotion Programme 2020 is part of the Climate Action Programme 2030.  3.2.iii. Description of policies and measures to promote energy services in the public sector and measures to remove regulatory and non-regulatory barriers that impede the uptake of energy performance contracting and other energy efficiency service models   The Federal Government has taken comprehensive strategic measures to eliminate obstacles to the roll-out of energy services in the public sector. These range from the provision of information and training through to funding programmes.  3.2.iii.1. Funding of energy performance contract consulting within the framework of energy consulting for non-residential buildings owned by municipalities/charitable organisations -residential buildings  3.2.ii.) is co-(with up to 80% of the net consulting fee) for municipalities and charitable organisations. During these checks, a qualified energy consultant determines whether and to what extent measures proposed in an earlier funded energy audit or energy consultancy session (renovation roadmap) can be implemented on the basis of a suitable contracting model. One aim is to alert municipalities to the wide range of potential contracting models which are available, many of which are relatively unfamiliar, in order to promote increased roll-out of energy performance contracting in particular. With the amalgamation of the guidelines for energy consulting for non-residential buildings owned by municipalities/charitable organisations and those relating to energy consulting for SMEs, the consulting on energy contracting will be further refined and developed.  3.2.iii.2. Dialogue on contracting between the Federal Government and the federal states The project will provide a platform for close cooperation in the field of energy performance contracting to the implementation of energy performance contracting and to build regional capacities in this area. Measures to be implemented include annual plenary meetings and workshops, as well as a mentoring programme and exchanges of best practices. The establishment of regional competence centres in the federal states will also be supported and model projects will be initiated.  3.2.iii.3. Model energy saving contracting projects Within the framework of the dialogue on energy saving contracting between the Federal Government and the federal states, funding is available for the concrete implementation of around 10-15 ambitious energy saving model contracting projects in prestigious properties in municipalities and at federal state level, with a view to exemplifying the potential of contracting and encouraging the establishment of a functioning energy saving contracting market in Germany. The model projects will also be used as a framework for training key stakeholders, to develop standards and guidelines for similar projects, and to further develop funding programmes.  3.2.iii.4. Information on sample contracts and guidelines The website of the Federal Office for Energy Efficiency contains model contracting agreements and energy saving contracting guidelines (all free of charge). Some of these are tailored to publicly owned real estate or municipalities.  3.2.iii.5. Municipality-level energy efficiency and resource efficiency networks Municipalities can set up a network for the purpose of this funding programme with the aim of improving their energy and/or resource efficiency. With the help of a network team, they will then be able to work together to identify and implement savings potentials. Municipalities and majority-owned municipal companies can also seek qualified consultancy services in relation to energy renovations of their building stock. For further information on this subject, reference should be made to Section 3.2.ii. on the long-term renovation strategy.  3.2.iv. Other planned policies, measures and programmes to achieve the indicative national energy efficiency contributions for 2030 as well as other objectives referred to in Section 2.2 (for example measures to promote the exemplary role of public buildings and energy-efficient public procurement, measures to promote energy audits and energy management systems, consumer information and training measures, and other measures to promote energy efficiency)  91   Carbon pricing  3.2.iv.1. Carbon pricing in the heating and transport sectors In addition to its importance for decarbonisation, the introduction of carbon pricing in the heating and transport sectors is also an important instrument for increasing energy efficiency. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.1.  Product efficiency  3.2.iv.2. EU Ecodesign Directive  further development of minimum standards Regulatory measure: further development of minimum standards for certain product groups, with the aim of regulating the level of efficiency of technologies. For suitable product groups, the further development of instruments towards establishing a systems approach will also be encouraged. For industry, cross-sectional technologies (including transformers, electric motors, heating pumps, etc.) are particularly relevant.  3.2.iv.3. Ambitious standards for energy labels and ecodesign In the EU negotiations on product specifications, the Federal Government will continue to call for ambitious standards for energy labels and ecodesign, and will approach the EU Commission to advocate for the inclusion of further product groups, for example from the commercial and the information and communication technologies sectors, in regulatory measures.  Measures to promote the exemplary role of public buildings  3.2.iv.4. Exemplary role of publicly owned buildings See Section 3.2.ii. on the long-term renovation strategy and the exemplary function of federal buildings.  Energy-efficient public procurement  3.2.iv.5. Energy-efficient procurement by public authorities The public sector is the largest consumer of goods and services in Germany, with purchases totalling around EUR 300 billion a year (around 13% of GDP) (Federal Environment Agency 2014). Article 6 of the Energy Efficiency Directive obliges Member States to ensure that central governments purchase only products, services and buildings with high energy-efficiency performance (save for a few narrowly defined exceptions). Regulations and laws promoting and requiring energy-efficient procurement have therefore been adopted in recent years. Section 67 (Procurement of supplies or services relevant in terms of energy consumption) of the Regulation on the Award of Public Contracts, which must be complied with by all public contracting authorities participating in EU-wide calls for tenders, states that the highest level of energy efficiency and (where available) the highest energy efficiency class must be required if the goods being procured are relevant in terms of energy consumption or if such goods represent a key prerequisite for provision of a service. Energy efficiency must also be used as a criterion when evaluating the economically most advantageous tender. Section 8c of the EU Public Procurement Rules for Construction Services contains provisions on the procurement of construction services which are identical in terms of substance. Over and above this obligation, the Unfair Competition Act, the Regulation on the Award of Public Contracts, the Public Procurement Rules for Services  Part A, Section 1, and for Construction Services  Part A and the Public Procurement Rules for Defence and Security also call for this type of procurement. The Federal Office for Energy Efficiency also publishes lists of energy efficiency criteria for various product categories as supplementary guidance for contracting authorities.  Energy audits/energy management system  3.2.iv.6. Expedited implementation of measures from energy audits and energy management systems (EMS) According to ยง8 of the Act on Energy Services and Other Energy Efficiency Measures, non-SMEs are required to carry out energy audits by 5 December 2015 and to repeat these audits at least every 4 years. If companies have introduced an energy management system (EMS) according to DIN EN ISO 50001 or an environmental management system, they are exempted from this requirement. The amendment to the Act on Energy Services and Other Energy Efficiency Measures introduces mandatory notification of the carrying out of an energy audit. In return, the companies involved receive a management summary, which not only gives them an overall view of their audit report, but also contains useful further information and best-practice examples. To further increase the implementation rate of the measures recommended in these audits, a system of voluntary commitment in industry is proposed; this system is to be structured in such a way that it would be as effective as a mandatory requirement (decision-making criteria are a payback period of up to 3 years, and an investment rate for energy efficiency to be determined based on annual profit).  3.2.iv.7. Funding of energy management systems 92  The purchase and installation of instrumentation and control technology and sensors for the monitoring and efficient regulation of energy flows in connection with their integration into an energy management system is the purchase and installation of energy management software and external training of staff in use of the maintenance of an energy management system within small and medium-sized enterprises.  3.2.iv.8. List of suppliers of the Federal Office for Energy Efficiency The Federal Office for Energy Efficiency maintains a free public list of providers operating across Germany which offer energy services, energy audits and other energy efficiency measures. In this list of providers, end customers can search by providers of specific energy efficiency services in their postcode area and compare providers on the basis of various criteria. Providers can present their range of energy services in the provider list.  Consumer information/training measures  Measures in the buildings sector aimed at implementation of the Energy Efficiency Strategy for Buildings are set out in the long-term renovation strategy, and the Federal Government funds energy consulting both for residential buildings and non-residential buildings.  3.2.iv.9. Independent consultancy services provided by Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e. V. (vzbv) See Section 3.2.ii. on the long-term renovation strategy.  3.2.iv.10. Federal funding for energy consulting for residential buildings (on-site consulting/individual renovation roadmap) See Section 3.2.ii. on the long-term renovation strategy.  3.2.iv.11. Energy consulting for non-residential buildings owned by municipalities/charitable organisations See Section 3.2.ii. on the long-term renovation strategy.  3.2.iv.12. Federal funding for energy consulting for SMEs Renovation concepts for commercial buildings owned by SMEs are funded under the  energy efficiency and perform an on-site inspection. An in-depth energy analysis is carried out in accordance with DIN EN 16247-1; this analysis contains clear information on potential savings and a concrete action plan. For further information, see Section 3.2.ii. on the long-term renovation strategy. Funding is also provided for consultancy services relating to the introduction and maintenance of an energy management system and for be achieved by means of a suitable contracting model and issues concrete recommendations for -ction 3.2.iii.).  3.2.iv.13. SME initiative for the energy transition and climate action joint initiative run by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy, the Federal Ministry of the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety, the Association of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce and the German Confederation of Skilled Crafts, with the aim of familiarising small and medium-sized enterprises with ways of improving energy efficiency and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Trade-specific information on the relevant topics is prepared and distributed to companies. Energy efficiency round tables will also be organised and implemented in order to facilitate trade-specific exchanges of experience on practical energy-related issues.  Industry  3.2.iv.14. EU ETS Innovation Fund: further development of the NER300 programme The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, it also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.5.  3.2.iv.15. National decarbonisation programme The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, it also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.5.  3.2.iv.16. Carbon avoidance and utilisation in primary industries programme 93  The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, it also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.5.  3.2.iv.17. Further development of efficiency networks The establishment of energy efficiency networks is to be stepped up. In conjunction with the measure to introduce a voluntary commitment on the part of industry to speed up the implementation of recommendations made as a result of statutory energy audits or energy management systems, efforts will be made to continue the Energy Efficiency Networks Initiative in order to increase the transfer of know-how between companies.  3.2.iv.18. Resource efficiency and substitution This is only to a efficiency programme. The goal of greater resource efficiency and resource substitution is to embed the principle of the circular or closed-loop economy in production processes, thus tapping into potentials for   3.2.iv.19. Consulting and information In addition to the topic of energy efficiency, companies should receive information and advisory services on the development and use of innovations with a focus on resource efficiency and substitution. The advice provided should build on the existing range of services already offered by the Centre for Resource Efficiency and wherever possible be combined with consulting in the area of energy efficiency. The focus of the company-specific advice should be on SMEs, as is the case with the overall advisory measures provided by the Centre for Resource Efficiency, since SMEs often have neither the time nor the staffing capacities to review their resource efficiency in their own companies. The use of environmental management systems should be increased (ProgRess II). Up to now, only energy consumption has been measured in energy audits; as proposed in ProgRess II, an explicit resource efficiency audit could be integrated into them.  3.2.iv.20. Funding Financial resources are necessary to enable companies to implement, in particular, more comprehensive investment measures, in order to successfully integrate and enhance resource efficiency within and along the value creation chain through digitalisation and Industry 4.0. Other benefits may include increased use of CO2-neutral raw materials and increased use of secondary materials. SMEs should be given special consideration here, since investment costs place a greater economic burden on SMEs than on larger companies. To provide evidence of material used and the related greenhouse gas savings, the submission of a resource efficiency plan detailing the savings and specifying possible secondary effects is needed. Funding is to focus on the use of resource-efficient processes and materials, and on resource substitution for lightweight construction. technology transfer programme for lightweight construction, in which a corresponding separate funding line has been integrated.  3.2.iv.21. Advanced training and vocational training To incentivise innovation and implement investments appropriately, specific further training for employees is also required. This further training should build on existing offers provided by the Centre for Resource Efficiency. For the consultations as per Point i, use can be made of the nationwide pool of qualified consultants already established by the Centre for Resource Efficiency in cooperation with the federal states (in accordance with VDI Guideline 4801).  3.2.iv.22. Energy tax benefits On a case-by-case basis, the Federal Government will examine the extent to which the existing energy tax goals.  Communications  3.2.iv.23. Energy efficiency communications The Federal Government is carrying out the public relations work and technical communication about specific energy saving options and the funding opportunities available via the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs will continue to develop this further. The emphasis will increasingly be shifted from general public awareness activities to technical communication and targeted consumer information. The goal is a greater degree of activation of energy consumers through a more tailored and preferably direct approach (subject-specific and target audience-specific). Alongside these efforts, a nationwide policy of ongoing communication on topics relating to the energy transition in general and on issues of efficiency in particular will ensure general consumers are kept informed and that the subject remains in the public eye. In addition, the Energy Efficiency Strategy 2050 will be communicated and, where applicable, monitored (see NEEAP meter) within the 94  framework of the general energy transition communication and the individual measures via the lead ministries.  3.2.iv.24. Information and Competency Centre for Future-Oriented Construction  The Information and Competency Centre for Future-Oriented Construction funds the transfer of knowledge and a society-wide dialogue on progress towards the energy-efficient construction of the future.  Transport  3.2.iv.25. Strengthening of rail passenger transport  The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.26. Increase in appeal of public transport The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.27. Expansion of cycle lanes and bicycle parking options as well as improvement of general conditions The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.28. Strengthening of rail freight transport The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.29. Modernisation of domestic navigation and use of shore power at ports The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.30. Funding for low-carbon passenger cars The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.31. Expansion of filling and charging infrastructure The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.32. Funding for low-carbon heavy goods vehicles The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.33. Filling, charging and overhead contact wiring infrastructure The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.34. Automation, connection and fluidification of the transport sector, facilitation of innovative forms of mobility The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.35. E-mobility tax incentives (Act on Further E-mobility Tax Incentives and the Amendment of Further Tax Provisions) The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.3.  3.2.iv.36. Energy efficiency standards for electric vehicles consumption of conventional propulsion systems (pro km). Vehicles powered by electricity or hydrogen, on the other hand, have no CO2 exhaust emissions regardless of the level of their energy consumption. Therefore, there is currently no European regulation on the energy efficiency of electric vehicles. Since the market share of these vehicles is likely to increase substantially, the German position with regard to regulation of energy efficiency standards should be conceptualised and developed in the dialogue process.  Agriculture 95   3.2.iv.37. Energy efficiency in agriculture The focus of the programme is emission reduction. At the same time, the programme also has an impact on reducing primary energy consumption. Please refer to Chapter 3.1.1.  3.2.v. Where applicable, description of policies and measures aimed at promoting the contribution of local renewable energy communities to the implementation of the policies and measures set out in paragraphs i, ii, iii and iv  At this point please refer to Section 3.1.2.v., which contains information on the regulatory framework for the development of renewable energy communities.  3.2.vi. Description of the measures to tap into the energy efficiency potential of the gas and electricity infrastructure  This will also entail the implementation of numerous improvement measures in the existing grid. For example, existing transformers will be progressively replaced by state-of-the-art transformers that meet the d Action Plan, the Federal Government identified measures to improve the national electricity grid. It also set out measures that will have a positive impact on the energy efficiency of the electricity infrastructure. In order to eliminate bottlenecks more efficiently, power plants in neighbouring countries should increasingly be involved in re-dispatching. Better regional control of further expansion of renewable energies can reduce the need for re-dispatching and associated losses of efficiency.  In addition, the implementation of the Efficiency First principle will, in principle, result in a reduced load on the electricity grid and can open up scope for increasing cross-border electricity trading in the European internal market. The Network Development Plan prepared by the German transmission system operator (NDP 2030) takes into account the growth of electricity demand in its planning for the expansion of the electricity system in all scenarios examined. The scenario framework approved by the Federal Network Agency for the 2019-2030 Network Development Plan provides for varying growth of net electricity consumption, depending on the scenarios. For all scenarios considered, a 5.7% increase in energy efficiency by 2030, i.e. 30 TWh of electricity savings compared to 2016, is assumed. It is anticipated that these savings will be achieved through the implementation of policy measures (for example, derived from the Climate Action Programme 2030). In its assessment of the supply need, the monitoring report by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy relating to the security of supply in the area of grid-based electricity supply also takes into account the expected energy savings as a result of efficiency measures.  earch Programme, research institutions and companies can, inter alia, receive funding for the development of technologies that can bring about a significant increase in efficiency in the electricity grid. In order to achieve a greater degree of flexibility in the demand for electricity, in addition to a reduction in energy demand, the implementation of efficiency measures, for example in industry, can be coupled with measures to improve flexibility that offer advantages for the electricity system.  3.2.vii. Where relevant, regional cooperation in this area  3.2.vii.1. German/French Energy Platform  March 2015. The German/French Energy Platform, which was set up on the basis of -related projects: the first relates to the preparation and cross-border exchange of best practices in the field of building renovation, and the second to cooperation on funding measures to boost the energy efficiency of industry. The German/French Energy Platform will be funded by the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy.  3.2.viii. Financing measures, including Union support and the use of Union funds, in the area at national level   Generous subsidies or pricing and incentive mechanisms form an integral component of funding measures in the field of energy efficiency. They supplement other measures by providing targeted financial incentives with a view to facilitating the application of energy efficiency principles to various use cases. They therefore allow energy consumers to reduce their energy costs in the long term. Investing in energy efficiency brings not only cost benefits for companies, but also new opportunities on international markets.  Funding 96   The Federal Government has put in place a framework to boost the development and spread of innovative energy technologies from Germany, inter alia through the funding of efficiency measures and measures relating to the use of renewable heat. Programmes of investment therefore supplement consulting and information measures by providing targeted financial incentives which facilitate the application of energy efficiency principles to various use cases. This allows energy consumers to reduce their energy costs in the -ost benefits for companies, but also new opportunities on international markets. For example, Germany exports significant quantities of goods used in connection with energy efficiency and renewable heat measures aimed at rational energy use and conversion, such as energy-efficient electrical appliances, insulating materials, building systems engineering or components for production processes. For further details of measures aimed at implementation of the Energy Efficiency Strategy for Buildings in the buildings sector, see Section 3.2.ii. -  3.2.viii.1. Funding strategy for energy efficiency and heat from renewable energy sources plan for reform of the funding structure has been developed and will be in place by 2021. The Federal Ministry efficiency and heat from renewable energy sources are a key factor in the achievement of the climate goals. Federal funding to the value of approx. EUR 4.3 billion per annum is available for these programmes for the next 4 years. To enhance the effectiveness, efficiency and service quality of the funding programmes, the May 2017 a concept was put forward with recommended actions for the fundamental reorganisation of the programmes. From that time until 2021, these recommendations will have been consistently implemented.  Efficiency measures have been given a new programme format and will be allocated to four funding priorities. These are:   Federal funding for energy consulting (see Section 3.2.ii on the long-term renovation strategy)  Energy-efficient buildings (see Federal funding for efficient buildings, 3.2.ii.)  Energy efficiency in industry and commerce (see Federal funding for energy efficiency in industry, 3.2.viii.)  Heating infrastructure (see Section 3.1.2.vi).  3.2.viii.2. Federal funding for energy efficiency in industry  grant and loan as well as funding competition The six existing funding programmes aimed at increasing energy efficiency in the industry sector were evaluated and consolidated within the framework of the funding strategy (see above). The current funding instruments were scrutinised, and any components which had proven successful retained; the necessary improvements were also made with a view to increasing funding effectiveness and funding efficiency. In future, the funding of investments in plant and process optimisation and in renewable process heat technology funding for energy efficiency and process heat from renewable energies in industry  and competitive funding will fall unfrom renewable energies in industry  Funding programme for energy efficiency and process heat from renewable energies in industry). This funding package will offer an internally consistent funding system aimed at increasing energy efficiency and the generation / use of process heat from renewable energies in processes. Restructuring the programmes in this way will result not only in technology-neutral systems optimisation and the use of renewables to generate process heating, but also in the replacement of individual components using low-threshold basic funding in the area of cross-sectional technologies. At the same time, the digitalisation of energy management will be supported through the provision of funding for investments in measurement, control and regulation technology. The funding package serves as a major incentive for companies to make timely and sustainable, holistic investments in this area, representing significant progress in terms of carbon reduction.  3.2.viii.3. Funding for mini cogeneration plants By the end of 2020, funding will be available for highly energy-efficient installations with an output of up to 20 kW which supply energy to residential and non-residential buildings.  3.2.viii.4. ACE II  Asset Class Energy Efficiency  measures more attractive to external financial backers. It tackles key implementation problems for energy due diligence procedures for the standardised assessment of specific energy efficiency measures, bundling approaches for energy efficiency projects in order to achieve a higher volume of investments, and proposals 97  will be validated and further developed in practice, to bring them more widely into application.  3.2.viii.5. Energy and Electricity Tax Act Tax incentives for the manufacturing sector are intended to avoid a situation where companies competing on the international market suffer disadvantages as a result of high energy charges. In addition to a general tax break of 25% for companies in the manufacturing sector and peak balancing with relief of up to 90% for energy-intensive companies, full tax exemptions are granted for certain energy- and electricity-intensive processes (e.g. electrolysis, metal working, manufacture of glassware and ceramic products). Peak balancing only applies if the company operates an energy management system or environmental management system (for SMEs: implementation of an alternative system) and the manufacturing sector as a whole achieves the annual energy intensity reduction target. All of the aforesaid tax exemptions have been evaluated with a view to deciding whether they are still necessary and whether they contribute to the achievement of goals. The findings are currently being evaluated