2.5 Energy security 2.5.1 Objectives With regard to the dimensions of energy security and of the internal energy market, it should be stressed that the qualitative and quantitative objectives that concern them are often complementary and interconnected, and both the policies and measures planned take into account both dimensions in most of the cases. The most typical example is energy infrastructures, both international and internal interconnections, that contribute to attaining objectives of both dimensions. With regard to the dimension of security of energy supply, the qualitative objectives developed in the context of the NECP are broken down into the following main categories:   71 Increasing the diversification of energy sources and suppliers from third countries Strengthening the diversification of energy sources and of fuel supplying countries, to prevent dependence on just one fuel or just one country, is a key objective for the following period. This diversification also increases competitiveness between fuels and suppliers from third countries for the benefit of Greek consumers and makes a substantial contribution towards strengthening the security of supply, also protecting the supply of energy to Greece in the event of an energy crisis at a regional level. Optimal utilisation and use of domestic energy sources: The recognition of potential and the most cost-effective utilisation of domestic energy sources are a key objective and aim for the development of the national energy system. More specifically, the utilisation and use of RES potential, both for power generation and for immediate supply and use in final consumption, make a substantial contribution towards energy security. However, on this axis it is also necessary to highlight the crucial role of improving energy efficiency and achieving energy security, in which we have a horizontal priority and first action for implementing policies and measures on all NECP themes. On a complementary basis, albeit with a different approach and planning policy, the exploration for extraction and the exploitation of domestic hydrocarbon fields are still energy policy axes for the following period and are included in the broader framework of utilising domestic energy sources. Strengthening and utilising the geopolitical role of Greece is a national objective. Therefore, there is an urgent need to complete the existing interconnections and to design new international interconnections with pipelines from third countries. In addition, these actions will also contribute to the diversification of energy sources and supply routes from third countries. More specifically, with regard to the electricity market in the next decade, the following interconnection projects are being implemented/promoted:  Second Greece-Bulgaria interconnection  Support through the implementation of the interconnection of Crete in the context of the Greece-Cyprus-Israel interconnection project  Upgrading the of Greece-Republic of Northern Macedonia interconnection   72 Greece is also promoting several cross-border / international gas transport projects, enhancing the diversification of energy sources for Greece and other European countries and, in conjunction with the promotion of natural gas storage systems, strengthens their energy efficiency in case of natural gas shortage. Reducing the energy dependency rate: Reducing the energy dependency rate is another important objective for the transformation of the national energy system. Moreover, high energy dependency is an issue that concerns the whole of the European Union, with the highest dependency is due to the particularly high use of petroleum products and, to a lesser degree, natural gas, which together account for more than 65% of gross domestic energy consumption and are almost entirely imported mainly from countries outside the European Economic Area. Within the context of the NECP, the objective is to initially prevent an increase in energy dependency rates and ultimately to reduce these rates gradually, ensuring the proper functioning and security of supply of the national energy system. In quantitative terms, this objective consists in reducing energy dependency from the high average rates of approximately 78% recorded in recent years. The initial aim is to prevent an increase in these rates and stabilise them at a level of 75%, and then to reduce them at around 70% by 2030. Essentially, a visible reduction in the rate of energy dependency is expected despite the lignite phase-out in domestic power generation and the recovery of the Greek economy, mainly due to the improvement in energy efficiency and the significant increase in the RES share. Moreover, the objective for the period after 2030 is to further and more rapidly reduce the rate of energy dependency primarily through an increase in the utilisation and use of the RES potential, an improvement in energy efficiency and an overall change to energy consumption patterns by increasing the utilisation of new technologies and applications. Interconnection of autonomous electrical island systems: In Greece, there are currently 29 autonomous island electrical systems (32 until the recent implementation of Cyclades Interconnection - Phase A in 2018), which require increased operating funds and cannot ensure  fully and under all circumstances  smooth and optimal power supply to consumers. The objective set is that, by the end of the next decade, most of these autonomous systems should be interconnected with the interconnected system, thereby achieving savings for the national economy, reducing energy dependency, providing the same high quality electricity and services to people, complying with the requirements of environmental legislation, and further utilising the potential of domestic renewable energy sources available in these island systems. 73 Even if the interconnection of some small and remote electrical systems is not technically efficient and cost-effective, innovative energy applications will be implemented in these terms, under this objective all autonomous electrical systems will have been interconnected or upgraded by 2029. Ensuring adequate system capacity: The objective is for Greece to ensure adequate system capacity in order to attain a minimum level of reliability for covering the demand for electricity -fired plants by 2028. To attain this objective, it will be necessary to adopt mechanisms for strengthening the system with power generating capacity or promoting demand response if the functioning and power generating capacity or developing demand response systems and operators. More specifically, the participation of demand in the internal electricity market will, apart from increasing adequate system capacity, will lead to a reduction in electricity costs and a decrease in energy dependency.   74  Island interconnections and RES penetration in autonomous island systems New island interconnections are being promoted in Greece, which are currently functioning as autonomous electrical systems based mainly on diesel-fired power plants. After the recent completion of Cyclades Interconnection - Phase A, the electrical systems of Paros (including the islands of Naxos, Antiparos, Ios, Sikinos, Folegandros, etc.), Syros and Mykonos were also interconnected. In the period 2020-2030, almost all the Aegean islands will also be interconnected, starting with the interconnection of Crete. Island interconnections will allow for supplying these islands with a cheaper fuel mix, thus avoiding the PUO charges made for power generation with imported diesel, which is more expensive. Upon completion of the interconnection programme, this is expected to ensure estimated annual savings, owing to the PUO charges, of EUR 0.5 billion. Reducing the use of diesel on the islands to be interconnected by 2030 will also contribute to a 3% reduction in energy dependency, as this will stop the consumption of more than 900 thousand tons of diesel annually for power generation on the islands at the end of the decade. Similarly, there are significant benefits in terms of reducing GHG emissions. Moreover, after the interconnection, it will be possible to utilise t-efficient way, to provide the same quality of electricity and services to Greek citizens and to comply with the requirements of environmental legislation. The aim is to have most of these autonomous systems interconnected with the interconnected system by the end of the next decade. For islands that are not expected to be interconnected, a significant reduction in the use of diesel for power generation is also being promoted, with the setup of state-of-the-art RES plants combined with storage technologies . In this direction, the setup of hybrid RES plants is promoted either through private projects or through pilot projects such as the CRES project for the  a hybrid RES plant has already been commissioned on the island of Ikaria and another one on the island of Tilos. Also, Greece participates actively in the new EU initiative , along with 13 other Member States.   75 2.5.2 Challenges The integration of uncontrollable RES plants (wind farms and photovoltaics in particular) increases the need for system flexibility. High penetration levels require energy storage for sufficient take-up of the energy generated by RES plants, also depending on the system interconnection level and the conditions of neighbouring systems. Moreover, storage also contributes to adequate system capacity. In order for RES to become the main source of energy in the mainland electricity system (and in island systems that will remain autonomous), major system transformation is needed to maintain and strengthen the security of supply. Another key challenge for the following period, apart from promoting lignite phase-out in the energy system, is reducing the energy dependency of Greece, including the gradual reduction of, and permanent end to, domestic lignite-fuelled power generation, thus necessitating the utilisation of the increased domestic RES potential and the improvement of energy efficiency in final consumption. The development of domestic hydrocarbon extraction, with maximum direct public economic benefits at national and local levels and in a way that is both safe and compatible with the natural and man-made environment, is another major challenge in the following period. Also, promoting a system of redistribution of hydrocarbon-derived resources to support local economies affected by the lignite phase-out in power generation is expected to mitigate the direct and indirect impact at a local level, making the operation of this feedback loop a priority in the public interest. With regard to policy measures for developing infrastructure for international and domestic interconnections, the major challenges are management complexity, time lags due to external factors and availability of resources, which require dynamic planning with the option of incorporating the different regulatory and technical challenges and external parameters. In this context, we should highlight the FSRU project in Alexandroupolis, which is a top priority project whose licensing process has really progressed already. This project has attracted the interest of investors wishing to obtain a holding in the share capital of the company that is implementing it. Moreover, the final market test phase, relating to capacity commitment, is expected to be completed by early 2020. The project has already attracted the interest of suppliers expecting to enter the Southeast and Central European market, thus contributing to the elimination of monopolistic regimes. It has also attracted the interest of final consumers in this geographical area wishing to have direct access to more competitive gas prices in order to 76 reduce their production costs. This has been designated as a project of common interest (PCI), and its effect in conjunction with the IGB pipeline, whose construction has started, at a regional level will be decisive in making Greece a real hub in the gas market. The aim is for the Hellenic Energy Exchange to put in operation a trading platform in the context of the gas market in 2020,  Similarly, the construction of an underground gas depot in the offshore field of South Kavala, which is being depleted, is an energy infrastructure that can offer a variety of mechanisms for supporting measures to mitigate and/or prevent supply security crises in Greece and contribute both towards ensuring balance in the transmission system and increasing competition, which will have an apparent impact in terms of reducing energy costs. Moreover, this infrastructure, in conjunction with the FSRU project in Alexandroupolis and the TAP and IGB gas pipelines, is very important for the Greek and Balkan markets. The underground depot can be used for the long-term storage of sufficient quantities of natural gas either for commercial purposes or for use in market, the existing infrastructures and the fact that power generation depends greatly on imported natural gas stress the need to construct the underground depot, which will serve as an additional entry point in the transmission system, thus increasing the level of energy security and contributing towards satisfying the infrastructure standard (N-1) and the supply standard provided for in Regulation (EU) 2017/1938. The procedures for conducting an international tender are at the final stage. Finally, with respect to demand response measures, changes need to be made to their implementation process, the completion of the electricity market reform, the development of the necessary monitoring infrastructure and systems (e.g. smart meters) and the selection of appropriate economic incentives to ensure the involvement of final consumers to whom they are addressed.   