193 3.6 Internal energy market The policy measures adopted with regard to the reorganisation of the domestic electricity and gas market, the strengthening of interconnection with neighbouring electricity markets and the strengthening of competition in the domestic market contributed to the reduction of energy costs and hence to the strengthening of competitiveness of the Greek economy and to avoid burdening and/or to alleviate electricity and gas consumers. To further reduce energy costs over the period 2021-2030, it is planned both to maintain and improve the most effective existing policy measures and to implement new measures that will decisively contribute to attaining the individual sub-targets. In particular, the reorganisation of the domestic electricity market and its harmonisation with the corresponding European and energy objectives while enhancing the competitiveness of the economy. The European electricity markets are coupled out through interconnections, thereby fostering competition and increasing the overall economic benefits for consumers and businesses. Therefore, in order to enhance competition and reorganise the electricity market, it should be accompanied by the promotion of the electricity transmission and distribution networks, including their digitisation and streamlining to enable the new market to function more effectively, involving consumers in the domestic electricity market and the supply of energy packages by suppliers. Digitisation will enable the dynamic pricing of energy supply and demand through the processing and exploitation of data (demand, meteorology, etc.). Moreover, the Greek State must address the particularly acute problem of electricity theft, by adopting policies that will motivate operators to identify these cases for the benefit of the community as a whole. Along with the measures to boost competition and restructure the domestic energy market, measures should be taken to protect consumers and address energy poverty. In particular, targeted measures should be taken to support and empower the residents of areas where lignite units are currently installed, which in the near future will be withdrawn, units that have for many decades provided jobs and high growth rates in those areas.   194 These policy measures aim to meet the following nine policy priorities (PP5.1-PP5.9) for the period 2021-2030 (Figure 8). PP5.1: Strengthening electricity and gas interconnectivity with neighbouring countries PP5.2: Promoting electricity transmission, distribution and storage projects PP5.3: Promoting gas transmission, distribution and storage infrastructure projects PP5.4: Digitisation of energy networks PP5.5: Strengthening competition in electricity and gas markets PP5.6: Measures for the development of electricity and gas networks PP5.7: Adjustable charges based on cost-effective incentive mechanisms PP5.8: Integrated development plans, investment actions and financing programs for lignite-producing areas undergoing a transition PP5.9: Protecting consumers and addressing energy poverty Figure 8: Policy priorities for reforming the energy market between 2021 and 2030.  The policy measures that have been specified in the above policy priorities are analysed separately in the following sections. 3.6.1 Boosting interconnectivity 3.6.1.1 Policies and measures to achieve the interconnectivity target  Existing electricity interconnections with neighbouring countries have made it possible, by increasing imports, to reduce the cost of electricity to relieve domestic consumers and boost business competitiveness. As RES-generated electricity increases its share in the energy mix, the contribution of interconnections to the management of the variable flows associated with these sources to avoid a reduction in clean energy quantities will be very significant. Managing the congestion of interconnections through the markets envisaged in the target model will contribute to price 195 convergence in the European electricity market as well as to the harmonious increase in the penetration of uncontrolled RES plants in the System. Measures to continue building new interconnectors and strengthen the existing ones is a key priority, while promoting policies that will encourage the construction of new power plants. Examples include the completion of the new interconnecting line between Greece and Bulgaria (Maritsa - Nea Santa), as well as exploring the strengthening of interconnections between Greece and the Republic of North Macedonia and between Greece and Turkey. Moreover, the completion of the interconnection with Crete supports the prospect of the interconnection of Greece with Cyprus and, through Cyprus, with Israel. Finally, it is proposed to investigate the possibility of improving the reliability of existing interconnections. To ensure the efficient allocation of interconnection capacity in a secure way, it is important to assess it using a common coordinated methodology to take into account the status of the networks, changing flows from RES and price volatility at regional level. The forthcoming operation of the Regional Security Coordinator (RSC) based in Thessaloniki, which is jointly established by the System Administrators of Greece, Bulgaria and Romania, is a very positive development within the aforementioned framework. Promoting the acceptance of the European legal framework by third countries such as those participating in the Energy Community and their participation in the RSC is necessary to extend harmonised management of interconnections and achieve interconnectivity objectives. It is critical to address early public acceptance problems in the construction of new interconnectors. Early involvement of local communities as provided for in the Ten-Year Network Development Plan (TYNDP) guidelines should also be pursued. The implementation of cross-border gas transmission projects and storage systems will -Eastern Europe as an energy hub. In the design phase, there are many energy infrastructure projects of direct interest to Greece, such as:  The East Med pipeline.  The Turkey-Greece-Italy Interconnection (ITGI).  The Interconnector Greece-Bulgaria (IGB).  The Greece - Republic of North Macedonia vertical interconnection.   196 3.6.1.2 Regional cooperation in this area  Within the framework of international links, regional cooperations have already been launched with the following countries: Albania Bulgaria Israel Italy Cyprus Republic of North Macedonia Turkey 3.6.1.3 Financing of measures in this area at national level, inter alia with EU support and the use of EU funds  The key financial instruments include:  Domestic resources  Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) 3.6.2 Transmission, power distribution and storage systems 3.6.2.1 Policies and measures to achieve key infrastructure objectives  The promotion of natural gas in the Greek territory is a key priority as it will help reduce energy costs for consumers, while the implementation of cross-border gas transport and storage projects requires the reinforcement of gas distribution, transportation and storage projects. In order to achieve this goal, the completion of the gas transport and storage projects under implementation or planning, as well as the expansion of the distribution network in the Greek territory, will be initiated by significantly strengthening consumers and businesses active in the areas where it expands, by means of reducing their energy costs. Moreover, the Development Plan of the National Natural Gas System (NNGS), drawn up by DESFA for the period 2020-2029, sets out and proposes, among others, the following NNGS development projects:  Compression station at Kipi.  The Metering/Regulation station at Komotini.  The Compression station at Ambelia.   197  Upgrading of the Compression Station at N. Mesimvria.  The Metering/Regulation station at N. Mesimvria for the connection of the NNGS with TAP.  The Nea Mesimvria-Idomeni/Gevgeli pipeline and Metering/Regulation station.  The pilot (first) liquefied natural gas tanker loading station.  The new Small Scale LNG pier at the Revythousa Terminal. Moreover, a policy measure is the modification of the development of the transmission system and the electricity distribution network, with the aim of expanding and upgrading it, in addition to meeting the needs of consumers, so that new RES plants can be installed to promote the in the wholesale electricity market. In proportion to the gas market today, many energy infrastructure projects of direct Greek interest are being developed, such as interconnection projects with the neighbouring countries described above and interconnection projects of the Non-Interconnected Islands with the HETS by ADMIE. The interconnection of the majority of Greek non-interconnected islands with the mainland electrical system, besides reducing the cost the electricity generation cost and, therefore, restricting the regulated charges imposed on the electricity bills of all customers through the public utilities, will help limit pollutants emitted and reduce energy dependency on other countries due to the limited use of oil products. Steps are also taken to promote the installation of electricity storage systems that will help to increase RES penetration and reduce electricity costs, while also enabling Electricity Producers to provide competing electricity packages to suppliers, and thus to electricity consumers, along with the other units they may have in their portfolio. In addition to the above, there is a need to completely digitise networks and meters management to reorganise the electricity and gas markets and enhance competition. In  install control systems of the operators should communicate with the network components via a telecommunication link.   198 Digitising energy networks As part of the energy transition to a pollutant-free energy system, increased control requirements are being created so that the production of changing RES be at all times in line with demand, while the role of system and electricity distribution operators becomes ever greater complex. In this regard, digitisation of networks is expected to play a particularly important role, contributing to the optimal control of the system. Visibility between system and distribution operators should be increased to achieve a coordinated management of (a) system and network congestion and (b) the use of balancing resources through the use of shared platforms. the grid from small-scale RES plants as well as flexibility services through demand response schemes or smart charging for electric vehicles. In the future, it will be possible to carry out transactions directly, without the mediation of a third party, through the direct exchange of data between the parties concerned. This is enabled through innovative information systems, digital applications and decentralisation technologies such as blockchain, which enable innovative decentralised energy and flexibility markets to operate in real time and to perform secure electricity transactions between end-users and small-scale producers. However, an additional risk factor is created as digitisation of all data moved, on the one hand, increases the complexity of the system dramatically and, on the other hand, makes the system more vulnerable to cyberattacks. It is therefore necessary to certify the equipment and communication protocols used to minimise the exposure of the system to possible cyberattacks. In turn, institutions at national and European level must ensure the necessary regulatory framework so that all required communications are secure. In this security strategy, and has already issued a recommendation on cyber security in the energy sector.   199 3.6.2.2 Regional cooperation in the field of gas transmission infrastructure  Within the framework of international links, regional cooperations have already been launched with the following countries: Albania Bulgaria Israel Italy Cyprus Republic of North Macedonia Turkey 3.6.2.3 Financing of measures in the field of gas transmission infrastructure at national level, inter alia with EU support and the use of EU funds  The key financial instruments include:  Domestic resources  Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) 3.6.3 Market consolidation 3.6.3.1 Policies and measures to achieve the relevant objectives  The reduction in energy costs is expected to result from the strengthening of competition both in the electricity sector and in the supply of electricity and gas. Indicatively, a package of measures to boost competition in the wholesale electricity market, as well as the adoption of mechanisms, where necessary, to ensure the viability of the electricity generation units and the continental system power adequacy, will be explored in the period 2021-2030. Meanwhile, the existing NOME mechanism has been abolished and an organised Greek energy market for financial products is being created, which will be launched in the first quarter of next year in order to achieve a smooth transition to the new market framework and not to slow down the steps to foster competition. Additional policy measures will be implemented to strengthen competition and reduce energy costs, such as the launch of the four markets envisaged in the Target Model and the coupling of the Greek electricity market with neighbouring markets.   200 In the context of measures to reform the domestic electricity market and strengthen competition, measures will be promoted to increase participation of demand and, in general, of consumers in the electricity market, thereby enabling consumers to influence electricity prices. At the same time, and in line with the Gas Market Roadmap 2017-2022, similar measures will be adopted in the gas sector such as the maintenance of gas releases and the implementation of policy measures for the reform of the retail and wholesale natural gas markets proportionately to the structure and operation of the reformed electricity market. In addition, according to the 2017-2022 Natural Gas Market Roadmap, in addition to increasing the use of natural gas in heating uses (mainly residential and commercial) through the expansion of the existing distribution network, the construction of a new distribution network in new geographic areas and the development of compressed and liquefied natural gas infrastructures, it is planned to design and implement important infrastructure projects of national and international interest with a view to strengthening and expanding of natural gas systems in the South-eastern Europe and the Eastern Mediterranean region. Finally, the Hellenic Energy Exchange in cooperation with the Ministry of the Environment and Energy, RAE and DESFA and with the support of a consulting firm, are finalising the plan to implement a gas trading platform for the Greek market. The implementation plan will outline the critical aspects of the venture of creating and developing a trading platform in line with the requirements of the European Balancing Regulation. All legal, regulatory, technical, operational and financial aspects are under consideration, with the aim of ensuring that negotiations on the spot market will be possible by the year 2021, and it is hoped that derivative products will soon follow. The gas trading platform to be operated and managed by the Hellenic Energy Exchange, combined with the development of infrastructure and interconnections, will practically make Greece the basis of a regional gas hub.   201 Schedule of operation of the new electricity market model The Greek government has set development and full operation of the new electricity market model by early June 2020 as a top priority in the energy sector for the near future. A key prerequisite for the transition of the Greek electricity market system to a unified European market, in accordance with the European legislation for the completion of the single electricity market and the achievement of the Target Model, is the coupling of our Markets with other European markets, first with Italy and Bulgaria and then with countries outside the EU, as long as they bring their legislation in line. In this regard, the launch of the go-live coupling for the Greek-Italian border and the addition of the Greek-Bulgarian border to the above IBWT project has already been approved by the Italian Borders Working Table Steering Committee (IBWT). Meanwhile, all the necessary laws and regulations have been put in place so that the relevant Operations continuously monitor and adhere to the relevant schedules, as well Greek energy market and to impose sanctions on the Greek authorities in cases of breach of EU and national law. Furthermore, provision is made to develop the necessary mechanisms and to adopt appropriate regulatory measures to protect consumers and to create fair competition conditions. Finally, measures are being taken to foster competition in the electricity market, such as the operation of the Energy Financial Market under Law 4425/2016, as applicable, in which, initially, it will be possible to negotiate futures contracts with a cash settlement and subsequently with a right of physical delivery, which are an essential tool for hedging financial risk. Forward trading is also expected to enhance long-term system design activities such as investment in production, transportation, distribution and demand management, indicating future expectations concerning market hourly prices and providing reliable financial signs to Participants.   202 3.6.3.2 Measures to increase the flexibility of the energy system  Greece is promoting measures to enhance the flexibility of the energy system through the involvement of demand in the market, further development of interconnections, integration of flexible units in the electricity system, as well as the provision of incentives for the deployment of storage systems. At the same time, the possibility of establishing Aggregators and Energy Communities has been instituted, enabling electricity consumers to operate in the electricity market, either as consumers or as producers, and through dynamic electricity tariffs, to restrict both the electricity costs of the System and the costs for consumers involved in these bodies. Demand participation in the electricity market will be made possible and strengthened through completed in the following decade. This will allow to send orders to grid users remotely, so that they change their load curve, to reduce electricity prices and to participate in ensuring the power adequacy of the electricity system. New technologies will make it possible to decentralise generation and to balance generation and demand locally. 3.6.3.3 Measures to ensure the inclusive participation of renewable energy, demand response and storage  As mentioned above, the Greek State has already taken measures to promote the participation of demand in the electricity market, both through by instituting Aggregators as well as the ability for consumers to participate in Energy Communities. Law 4414/2016 also stipulated that all new power plants would have to participate, above a certain power limit, in the electricity market by submitting an appropriate, priced supply-forecast either on their own or through the Aggregators. If they submit an incorrect forecast, RES plants will be charged with the corresponding charges-fines. In addition, the full regulatory framework for the operation of storage systems in the electricity market will have been developed and it will be possible to develop these systems as part of generation units with simplified administrative procedures to authorise their operation by 2020.   203 Already in the energy offsetting scheme, provision is made to operate storage systems exclusively for the storage of energy generated by self-generation RES systems and for its use by end consumers to meet their electricity needs at a later time. 3.6.3.4 Policies and measures to improve the performance of operators by applying regulated charges based on cost-effective incentive mechanisms  Losses of electricity in electricity transmission and distribution networks are now burdening electricity providers and therefore consumers. Therefore, the introduction of policy measures to mitigate these losses through the application of regulated charges on the basis of cost-effective incentives and achievement of objectives will lead operators to step up their efforts to reduce these losses, and this methodology could also include specific innovative development activities contributing to national targets and the achievement of comparable indicators regarding the timing of the integration of RES units into the networks. Generally, operators can benefit from positive performance incentives in their areas of activity in line with best practices at European level. 3.6.3.5 Measures to develop electricity and natural gas networks  To date, domestic electricity transmission and distribution networks have been developed with the aim of linking the urban centres with the decentralised conventional electricity generation plants, while gas networks have respectively been developed to supply gas as an alternative energy source. However, even in the context of energy transition, structural changes in the design of network development projects are now required. In particular, the increased penetration of RES both at the transmission and distribution level, ensuring their connection and unhindered operation, development of a trans-European energy network with sufficient interconnectivity to electricity and gas networks, diversification of sources and suppliers from third countries to enhance security of supply, as well as expansion of the use of gas to final consumption and distribution throughout the country, are setting new challenges and parameters that should be taken into account in the development planning of energy networks.   204 To this end, energy network operators should adapt and update their development plans, taking into account the following axes:  Flexibility - smart energy management systems and technologies  Accessibility - equal access for all users on the network  Security - access to different energy sources to enhance the security of energy supply  Sustainable economy - networks should be developed and managed on an equal, fair and transparent playing field for the benefit of consumers Although the country has fully complied with EU Directives and has split the ownership of electricity and gas transmission networks, it is a strategic goal of the Greek Government to further liberalise and accelerate the development and management of domestic energy transmission and distribution networks, in line with the new market demands. To this end, the Greek Government has developed an ambitious privatisation programme as a means of creating a framework for impartial, transparent and fair competition, attracting new long-term strategic investors and leveraging new private capital. The programme aims at mobilising and accelerating new strategic investments in the development, upgrading and digitisation of networks in order to enhance the quality of services provided and to create the conditions for the development of new value-added combination products for the benefit of consumers. the authority responsible for overseeing the proper development and operation of electricity and gas networks. 3.6.3.6 Integrated development plans, investment actions and financing programmes for lignite areas undergoing a transition  Phase-out of lignite in the areas whose economy is heavily dependent on lignite mining makes it imperative to address the direct and indirect impacts on these areas (detailed presentation in PP1.1). As a result of the restructuring of the energy mix and the deregulation of power generation, an integrated action plan is planned to be fully implemented before the start of the transition period, which will lead to the creation of new business opportunities through a new economic model in order to offset the surge in job dismissals due to the closure of lignite production plants. 205 For this reason, and under the auspices of an inter-ministerial committee, a comprehensive, multi-dimensional and forward-looking Fair Transition Development Plan will be prepared and presented by mid-2020, which will include a set of measures and forecasts reflecting the transition strategy for lignite areas. The above strategy will be put into practice by planning and implementing a Special Transition Development Plan for the post-lignite era.  for these areas, with a restored natural environment, quality of life, a diversified production model and entrepreneurship as a dominant choice. 3.6.3.7 Policies and measures to protect consumers and improve competition  Consumer policy measures will include, among other things, adoption of a regulatory framework for the protection of electricity consumers from high electricity market prices on the wholesale market. Moreover, strengthening the necessary control mechanisms to ensure the transparent and lawful operation of the oil market and to safeguard consumer protection is a priority. At the same time, in order to enhance the penetration of alternative fuels and electrification, aid for stations is planned so that they are modernised and so that they supply consumers with the whole set of alternative fuels. 3.6.4 Energy poverty 3.6.4.1 Policies and measures to achieve the relevant objectives  With regard to combating the phenomenon of energy poverty, the improvement of the existing measures of the social tariff and the status of the Universal Service will be launched, involving only energy-vulnerable households. as a support measure for vulnerable electricity consumers, which will replace the other support measures for the consumption of energy goods and which will enable consumers to select themselves the way in which they will have their energy needs met.   206 Targeted financing programmes will be designed to improve the energy efficiency of residential buildings of households that are vulnerable with regard to energy. In addition, incentives will be explored for both energy suppliers under the energy efficiency obligation scheme and for energy communities, so that they contribute more actively to the energy upgrading of such buildings.  Addressing energy poverty Addressing energy poverty is a major challenge by 2030 to reverse the effects of this phenomenon, which have been exacerbated by the economic downturn. Achieving this goal requires the design and implementation of a coherent and effective strategy, which will aim to permanently and radically combat the phenomenon rather than its temporary mitigation through temporary and short-term measures. This strategy will be specified and outlined in the Energy Poverty Action Plan, which will be completed in the first half of 2020. The action plan will include both the definition of households experiencing energy poverty through specific quantitative criteria, as well as a specific process to monitor and evaluate the evolution of the phenomenon. In addition, specific policy measures will be specified, in accordance with the requirements of both Directive 944/2019 and Directive 2002/2018, and a specific process will be developed to monitor and measure the impact of each measure separately, in order either to redesign them or to adopt new policy measures.   207 3.6.5 Fossil fuel subsidies technologies that are phased out or may not be viable in the long run should not be supported by public funding. Despite the challenges associated with the transition, our country is making progress in reforming its subsidies for fossil fuels across a wide range of sectors. greater participation of RES in the energy mix, phase-out of lignite-fired power plants, electrical interconnection of NIIs, electrification of end consumption, improvement of energy performance and energy savings in the end sectors. However, in the context of social policy, general aid policies for the cost of supplying energy products, based on specific income and property criteria, such as the Social Domestic Tariff (SDT), the reconnection programme, the allowance scheme for the purchase of heating oil, which is in place for the year 2019-2020, as well as for the cost of electricity in non-interconnected islands, are also implemented. In the electricity sector, it is obvious that the above social policy through energy products will no longer constitute an indirect subsidy to fossil fuels in the short to medium term, as the mix of electricity generation is changing rapidly and there is a constant increase in RES participation, amounting to over 65% of domestic electricity generation and given the interconnection of almost all islands by 2029 and the development of hybrid power stations in the rest. In addition, the increase in electricity tariffs acts in competition to the allowance for the purchase of heating oil and/or options to meet the thermal needs using combustion of carbon and inappropriate materials (plastics), which had dramatically burdened the atmosphere of the big cities and caused fatalities in the past. Through the energy product tariffs, the above social policies will be reviewed in accordance with the relevant Directive, and specific action plans will be provided in the Action Plan to combat energy poverty. In the context of social policy, consumer protection and the fight against energy poverty, the support to all vulnerable groups facing the risk of poverty and/or social exclusion through long-term and sustainable solutions.    208 This also includes measures to promote the renovation of buildings through programmes providing specific categories of subsidies for the economically weaker population groups, and self-generation programmes that are expected to contribute to this and also to reduce the need to strengthen citizens through energy product tariffs. 3.6.6 Summary of policy measures Table 24 summarises the policy measures envisaged to achieve individual objectives as part of the internal energy market dimension.  209 Table 24: Planned policy measures for the internal energy market. Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure M1 Reinforcement of electricity interconnections with neighbouring countries. PP5.1, PP5.9 Electricity interconnectivity Energy transmission infrastructure Energy market integration Adequacy of electrical system Flexibility of energy system Consumer protection  Improvement of competition Energy poverty Electricity Technical measure M2 Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) of planned investments PP5.1, PP5.2, PP5.3, PP5.4 Electricity interconnectivity Energy transmission infrastructure Energy market integration Adequacy of electrical system Electricity Technical measure M3 Development of interconnections of non-interconnected islands to the mainland system. PP5.2, PP5.9 Electricity interconnectivity Energy transmission infrastructure Energy market integration Adequacy of electrical system Flexibility of energy system Consumer protection Electricity Technical measure  Support of international natural gas transmission projects. PP5.1, PP5.9 Gas interconnection Energy transmission infrastructure Energy market integration Adequacy of electrical system Flexibility of energy system Consumer protection Improvement of competition Energy poverty Electricity Natural gas Technical measure   210 Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure  Support of electricity and gas storage projects. PP5.3, PP5.6, PP5.7, PP5.9 Electricity interconnectivity Energy transmission infrastructure Energy market integration  Adequacy of electrical system Flexibility of energy system Consumer protection Improvement of competition Electricity & Gas Technical measure  Support of projects for extension of the distribution network. PP5.2, PP5.6, PP5.3, PP5.7, PP5.9 Electricity interconnectivity Energy transmission and distribution infrastructure  Adequacy of electrical system Flexibility of energy system Consumer protection Energy poverty Electricity & Gas Technical measure  Adoption of a long-term capacity adequacy mechanism. PP5.2, PP5.9 Adequacy of electrical system Consumer protection Electricity Regulatory measure  Continuation of the implementation of reforms for reshuffling the electricity market and of the implementation of the Target Model. PP5.5, PP5.9 Energy market integration  Consumer protection  Improvement of competition Electricity Regulatory measure  Continuation of the adoption of measures for coupling the electricity market with the markets of the neighbouring countries. PP5.4, PP5.5, PP5.9 Energy market integration  Consumer protection  Improvement of competition Electricity Regulatory measure   211 Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure  Adoption of measures for strengthening demand response and for the participation of demand in the wholesale electricity market. PP5.4, PP5.5, PP5.9 Consumer protection  Improvement of competition Electricity Regulatory, technical measure  Maintenance of mechanism for the disposal of natural gas quantities through electronic auctions (gas release). PP5.5, PP5.9 Consumer protection Improvement of competition Electricity & Gas Regulatory measure  Continuation of measures/policies for reforming the retail and wholesale natural gas market. PP5.5, PP5.9 Consumer protection Improvement of competition Electricity & Gas Regulatory measure  Maintenance of social tariff scheme. PP5.9 Energy poverty Consumer protection Residential sector Economic measure M14 Adoption of measures for protecting consumers from high electricity market prices on the wholesale market PP5.9 Consumer protection All sectors of final energy consumption Regulatory measure  Provision for the automatic transition of vulnerable domestic customers into the Universal Service scheme. PP5.9 Energy poverty Residential sector Regulatory measure   212 Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure  Exploration of the  PP5.9 Energy poverty Residential sector Economic measure  Energy upgrade of residential buildings of households that are vulnerable with regard to energy and promotion of the installation of RES plants for the purpose of meeting their energy needs PP5.9 Energy poverty Residential sector Economic measure  Motivation of existing mechanisms for actions in vulnerable households PP5.9 Energy poverty Residential sector Economic measure  Strengthening the necessary control mechanisms to ensure transparency of the oil market. PP5.5, PP5.9 Consumer protection Improvement of competition All sectors of final energy consumption Regulatory measure  Programmes for lignite areas undergoing a transition PP5.8 Smooth transition of lignite areas All final consumption sectors consumption Economic measure   213 3.7 Energy transition policies in the agricultural, shipping and tourism sectors Making the most of the potential for emission reductions, promoting RES and improving energy efficiency in specific sectors of the Greek economy, such as agriculture, shipping and tourism, are also a priority for the period 2021-2030. In particular, seven policy priorities in these new areas (PPN.1-PPN.7) are integrated with a view to making the most of the existing potential (Figure 9). PPN.1: Promoting infrastructure for the use of natural gas PPN.2: Handling and utilising agricultural and livestock residues PPN.3: Promoting the use of RES and energy efficiency improvement actions in ports PPN.4: Developing domestic production of advanced biofuels and supply chains for their use PPN.5: Promoting the use of RES and energy efficiency improvement actions in the agricultural sector PPN.6: Sustainable tourism development and destination management plans PPN.7: Promoting the use of RES and energy efficiency actions in tourist complexes Figure 9: Policy priorities in the field of agriculture, shipping and tourism for the period 2021-2030. The policy measures that have been specified in the above policy priorities are analysed separately in the following sections. 3.7.1 Policies and measures in the agricultural sector The basic principles of the agricultural sector in line with the Greek Rural Development Programme adopted by the European Commission for the period (2014-2020) include, in particular, enhancing the viability and competitiveness of agricultural holdings, maintaining and agricultural development priorities can also be achieved through complementary sectoral policies by increasing its added value, such as the contribution of energy products. 214 As a result, a policy package is needed to harness the potential of the agricultural sector to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, promote RES and improve energy efficiency. The use of biomass for energy generation in Greece is limited in relation to the availability of residual biomass. The following measures are proposed to promote biomass for energy production: I. Priority in the use of waste (agri-livestock units and industries, urban): To promote the use of energy from biomass, with a focus on new technologies, it is necessary to take into account the availability of biomass in Greece in terms of the availability of agricultural/forestry residues and waste from the industries concerned, as well as the biodegradable fraction of urban waste and sewage, in relation to the principles of the Circular Economy and the relevant legislation on waste, so as not to distort the competitive markets of biomass (food, feed, materials). Priority should be given to avoiding or reducing waste (agricultural/forestry, livestock, urban), to waste recycling and use for heat/electricity generation, as well as advanced biofuels for transport. Bioenergy support systems, which would run counter to waste treatment targets and would lead to inefficient use of recyclable waste, should be avoided. II. Supply chain organisation and land planning of sites for temporary storage of agricultural/forest residual biomass: The organisation of the supply chain from the collection of residual raw materials in the primary sector, its processing and conversion into the secondary sector, the heat and power distribution networks to engineers, supervisors, technicians, plant maintainers, requires supportive measures because it involves high costs that may inhibit the sustainability of future investments in the production of bioenergy and biofuels or bioliquids. These measures should also include support for the development of infrastructure for the temporary storage, pretreatment and storage of residual biomass within private premises/plots and/or central collection points (biomass management centres), which will help to address the inappropriate practice of open burning sites observed in the countryside. Managing centres may be either private or public (e.g. municipal or regional) and their existence will generally make it easier to access biomass and exploit it through the activities of circular economy.   215 III. Maintenance and extension of the sustainability certification scheme for biofuels, bioliquids and solid fuels to ensure that only sustainable biofuels, bioliquids and solid fuels are used in the Greek territory. IV. Sustainable forest management: Rational logging of forests, update of forest management studicycle of periodic logging operations with specific requirements and conditions. Enhancing the role of energy communities and cooperatives in cleaning up forests to protect them against fires in accordance with specific technical specifications and utilising the woody biomass removed for energy purposes. In addition, a LULUCF strategy will be explored with a view to increasing afforestation and, thus, to maximise the absorption contribution to the transition to a future of climate neutrality. V. Strengthening the primary sector through the promotion of energy crops of woody biomass or coppice plantations: In addition to the utilisation of agri-livestock waste and agricultural/forest residues, the primary sector could also contribute to the production of biomass (solid biofuels) from the cultivation of short-rotation forest species and other perennial plants (e.g. reed). These energy crops will provide additional jobs in the region, and will also increase the availability of biomass to minimise the need for imported biomass. Relevant support measures are to support such investments through specific reference to financing programmes (NSRF, Rural Development, etc.), to simplify the process of implementing such crops by either natural or legal persons, and land planning in regions throughout Greece where it will be possible to cultivate such crops (degraded soils, nitrified soils, quarries after mining etc.) so that their development will not compete with other markets (food, feed, materials). VI. Creation and enhancement of the domestic bioethanol market, by enhancing conventional bioethanol (i.e. bioethanol derived from the processing of agricultural food items such as corn, wheat, beet, etc. according to the applicable sustainability criteria), and above all provision of support to the advanced production of bioethanol from the use of residual forms of biomass and waste as well as non-food crops. Relevant support measures concern bioethanol or bioethers blending with conventional transport gasoline, and also a provision to introduce cellular (advanced) bioethanol with specific low blending rates.   216 VII. Development of the biomethane market, both for its injection into the natural gas network and its use as a transport fuel. In order to achieve this goal, a specific licensing process should be instituted in order to allow for the earliest possible implementation of bio-methane production plants, with the aim of achieving the greatest possible substitution of natural gas from domestically produced and renewable biomethane. As biomethane is produced using low-cost materials and organic waste for the purpose of producing high-value gas fuel, this priority will contribute to more efficient waste management. The revised Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) introduces specific measures in the context of Green Direct Aid to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by promoting sustainable food production, sustainable farm management and environmentally and climate-friendly practices and methods. The measures that will be implemented aim at preventing desertification, improving water management, reducing the intensity of natural resources, optimising the use of agricultural land, reducing the use of fertilisers and improving animal waste management. The promotion and increase of organic farming is also a key priority of the next Rural Development Programme, contributing to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Specific policy measures will be launched to harness the high potential for installing RES plants and systems in the agricultural sector. In particular, measures will be designed to install mainly photovoltaic systems through the energy offsetting and virtual energy offsetting scheme in both agricultural and livestock holdings and pumping stations. In addition, RES installation on high productivity land will be launched taking into account the provisions of the licensing and spatial planning framework to ensure that energy production does not compete with the economic activities of the agricultural and livestock sector. RES systems for heating and cooling on agricultural and livestock holdings will be promoted, as an indication of the utilisation of geothermal energy and other forms of RES in greenhouses. Finally, the consumption of biofuels will be enhanced both in machinery used in agricultural and livestock holdings and in other activities.   217 In terms of energy efficiency improvement, measures will be promoted to replace existing machinery and installations used in both agricultural and livestock holdings with new high energy-efficient ones. Priority will be given to high energy-consuming machinery and equipment, such as tractors, mowers and harvesters, cotton pickers and seeders on farms and milking machines, poultry incubators, cleaning machines and feeding troughs in livestock holdings. Emphasis will be placed on pumping stations and crop irrigation systems by designing measures that will both reduce energy consumption and save water. Energy efficient equipment will be promoted for the main systems used such as pumps, artificial rain assemblies, self-propelled launchers, drip irrigation systems and self-propelled artificial rain assemblies. In addition, energy-efficient heating, cooling, ventilation and lighting systems will be introduced into agricultural and livestock holdings, including greenhouses. For the production of thermal and cooling energy in particular, this objective will be achieved by both individual and central systems. In this regard, the potential of installing district heating and micro-cogeneration systems will be explored. Other actions to be launched include installation of control systems, thermal insulation of buildings and heat recovery from various processes using alternators. Finally, priority will be given to informing and educating practitioners on energy saving practices to be adopted through specific tools such as developing targeted energy checks and updating certification and energy labelling schemes. 3.7.2 Policies and measures in shipping 3.7.2.1 Promoting infrastructure for the use of natural gas in shipping  During the last two decades, the mix of the international energy map and, by extension, in Europe, also includes RES, as well as goals of energy efficiency in the wider contecommitments, as originally emerged from the Framework Convention on Climate Change, international contracts as well as European directives. In particular, with respect to the shipping sector, Annex VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL 1973/78) by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) introduces the obligation to apply worldwide a new maximum limit for sulphur content of marine fuels as of 1 January 2020, and there stricter restrictions are put in place in designated specific emission control areas (e.g. Baltic and North Sea). Meanwhile, Annex VI of the International Convention MARPOL 1973/78 sets out a complete set of rules, within the IMO, for the control of other harmful 218 emissions from ships (NOx, ODS, VOC combustion), with a view to tackling global air pollution and protecting the environment and human health. In line of its Initial Strategy adopted in 2018, the International Maritime Organization is considering potential short-, medium- and long-term measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from ships, of which the first category (short-term measures) will be adopted by -emission and zero-carbon technologies necessary to aclong-term binding objective and its above mentioned Initial Strategy. Seagoing shipping, due to its global operation in the context of free international competition, will be governed by IMO global measures, applicable worldwide and irrespective of the flag of the ship. As for sulphur, its ceiling on international shipping fuels will be reduced to 0.5% from 1.1.2020 as opposed to the current rate of 1.5% (for liners) or 3.5% (for other ships), while for the special ship emission control areas the applicable 0.10% ceiling already applies from 1.1.2015. At present, for some shipping sectors such as liners operating on short sea shipping and ferries, a reliable option among the alternative fuels is bunkering using liquefied natural gas, because it offers environmental benefits, on the one hand, and fuel cost savings, on the other. In particular, liquefied natural gas provides 20-25% lower CO2 emissions, 90% for NOx and 99% for sulphur oxides (SOx) and microparticles, compared to marine fuel oil. Studies show that there is a greater growth in available facilities for liquefied natural gas bunkering of ships in Northern Europe (as opposed to the Mediterranean). In actual figures, some 170 ships worldwide are already using liquefied natural gas as fuel, and even more have being ordered, which leads many ports, mainly Asian, already to develop liquefied natural gas refuelling infrastructure.   219 However, LNG is not considered a long-term viable solution for seagoing shipping. EU and national legislation has included arrangements for the development and implementation of alternative fuel infrastructure, and for the safe bunkering of ships. Promoting the use of liquefied natural gas as a marine fuel has been Roadmap 2017-Council. In addition, Greece participates in the European programme Poseidon Med II, together with Italy and Cyprus, which aims to introduce liquefied natural gas into the shipping industry as primary fuel, as well as to develop a bunkering infrastructure network. In a first stage, it is envisaged to create relevant infrastructures, initially in the ports of Patras, Heraklion, Igoumenitsa, and then to ensure the supply of liquefied natural gas to ships with either mobile or coastal facilities and other Greek ports of strategic importance for ferry services such as Rhodes and Syros. In the port of Piraeus, which will be the main centre for the supply of liquefied natural gas to ships, no storage facilities are needed and the ships will be refuelled with liquefied natural gas barges and tankers. For this reason, within the framework of the Poseidon Med II programme, site design studies, security studies, environmental impact studies, economic studies, ship design, process planning etc. are being prepared so that Greece, due to its geographical location, becomes a strategic player in the supply of liquefied natural gas to ships. However, as the wider adoption of liquefied natural gas as a fuel for shipping will depend on global and European availability of liquefied natural gas supply infrastructure, the price of liquefied natural gas, financing issues and the need for clear regulatory policy, coordinated international/European actions and coordination of all the Ministries involved in the country to immediately promote the actions, are needed to achieve this. A key action that will contribute to the development of liquefied natural gas is initially the development of the relevant infrastructure. In this context, DESFA has already included in the Ten-Year Development Plan of the National Natural Gas System the construction of a pier at the Revithousa terminal with a budget of EUR 34 million. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2023 and will involve a port facility for the bunkering of vessels with a capacity of 1 000-20 000 cubic meters of liquefied natural gas.   220 Moreover, DESFA has also included in the same Development Programme the construction and operation of a facility for the transhipment of liquefied natural gas in tankers, which is expected to become operational by 2021. The two projects provide synergies and help make better use of existing infrastructure. It is also necessary to adopt or modify the Master Plans for the ports, which will form a central network in Greece and will include the necessary facilities as well as the operation of refuelling ships with liquefied natural gas, initially in ports which are particularly important for ships such as Piraeus / Patra / Igoumenitsa / Heraklion / Thessaloniki / Rhodes / Syros. An important aspect is the completion of the regulatory framework for the implementation of the above projects, including the development of manuals and rules for the safety of mobile tanks in lorries and ships, as well as in coastal facilities and barges, as well as the participation in training programmes for the construction, support and maintenance of coastal facilities and mobile tanks, barges and lorries. The current regulatory framework consists of the newly adopted Decree 64/2019 (Government Gazette, Series I, No 103, 20.6.2019 - Regulation on the safe bunkering of ships, regardless of flag, with LNG in ports, port facilities and territorial waters of the Greek territory, from bunkering facilities, bunkering vessels, etc.), that is in force since 20 July 2019. Proposed actions for the following period are:  Prioritising the construction of a small-scale LNG pier at Revithoussa Terminal  Implementing a small or medium-scale coastal liquefied natural gas port infrastructure, based on the volume of bunkering capacity, at central coastal shipping ports and the ports of Piraeus and Patras as ports of departure, through the use of financial instruments.  Promoting the production of small-scale liquefied natural gas (LNG) facilities by Greek industries and shipyards (storage tanks, transport tanks, etc.).  Investigating the possibility for Greek shipyards to construct liquefied natural gas ships and barges by introducing financial instruments and providing incentives (financial, tax etc.).  Adopting deductions on docking costs and fees for ships using liquefied natural gas as fuel.   221  Imposition of strict environmental standards and financial/tax support for the conversion/replacement of ships operating exclusively within the boundaries of ports or between ports offering liquefied natural gas bunkering facilities (e.g. tugs, general and special cargo vessels, urban sea transport).  Promoting education and training actions for human resources involved in port adaptation actions and policies for LNG use Finally, there is a need to further strengthen research in order to find other environmentally and economically viable solutions. Hydrogen is a future solution, although it is currently at an early stage of development. It is noted that Greece has a significant track record in scientific investigation and research in the field of hydrogen production from RES. relevant programmes promoting hydrogen as a fuel in shipping, in the more specifically targeted areas applications where this is appropriate (e.g. barges in terminals or hydrogen-powered ferry boats with an electric motor). A typical example is the initiative developed by the Norwegian authorities, with the ultimate aim of building and operating a hydrogen-powered ferry boat with an electric motor or converting an existing oil-powered ship to hydrogen-powered, as well as the use of barges at Dutch terminals). However, the application of hydrogen is not attractive to seagoing vessels as it involves a significant reduction in the useful capacity of ships and is a complex and expensive investment. The above constitute an area of partnership development for the research community and the support of the domestic maritime industry will be explored. 3.7.2.2 Promoting the use of RES, Electricity and Electrification, and energy efficiency improvement actions in ports  Energy consumption occurring in ports, either because of their internal energy needs or because of the ships moored in them, is particularly important and therefore a component of planning interventions as part of the NECP.   222 Bearing in mind that the competitive cost of electricity generation from RES now enables the design and integration of local, mainly photovoltaic RES plants into ports to cover both own consumption in the form of self-generation, and the gradual transition to the electrification of some of the ports main consumptions (e.g. electrification of their fleet), as well as ships, either during mooring or inland voyages, policies and measures should be designed and adopted to enable this potential to be harnessed in the optimum technical and economic way. Many European and international ports have already progressively taken electrification actions and replaced fuels, integrating in many cases local grid-based power generation and management systems to power their operations, including powering ships exclusively with electric power from RES initially for inland voyages. This approach leads to a drastic reduction in emissions of gaseous pollutants, especially NOx, to ports and neighbouring urban areas with immediate visible benefits to public health. However, in order to implement this port electrification and RES promotion plan, local electricity networks need to be strengthened also at the level of substations, taking into account hourly and peak loads for both demand at ports and demand for specific energy consumptions on ships. There is a need for more specific design to meet the energy consumption needs of cruise ships, whose energy needs in mooring are particularly demanding. In this context, cost-benefit studies will be developed in the next period, with the co-operation and coordination of the relevant departments of government agencies and port organisations, in order to design specific incentives for investment in RES projects to meet the needs of Greek coastal shipping at ports (such as a special licensing scheme/tax and investment incentives), as well as for the installation of substations and strengthening of networks (tax/investment/securing the possibility financing of part of the project by banking institutions). Concerning the electrification of ships, pilot applications will initially be supported and the aim is to operate specific voyages by electric ships by 2030, by developing both the appropriate infrastructure and a regulatory framework that will enable the electrification of ships. Where appropriate, consideration should also be given to developing licensing and/or financial incentives for the installation of relevant infrastructures and/or the provision of tax reliefs for the operation of ships making use of the electricity and electrification facilities.   223 In addition, actions to improve their energy efficiency and to adopt energy management systems will be promoted at the port level, so that overall the intensity of energy activity in relation to their economic activity can be improved and made more efficient. Another aspect of the issue that needs to be addressed, given the limited ability to provide ove, is to ensure the provision of electricity to vessels, whatever the demand fluctuation may be. It is therefore necessary to develop mid-to-long-term viable alternatives that will use new and existing technologies to design infrastructures, both in ports and on the basis of conversion of the mechanical parts of vessels, with a view to ensuring their energy autonomy. In the medium term, it is proposed to investigate the know-how necessary for the future planning of interventions for the energy autonomy of vessels. Indicatively, the use of innovative technologies for the electrification of vessels can be achieved through:  their electric charging at ports to store power for their maximum energy autonomy at sea (hybrid vessels / electric vessels) and/or  a combination of the use of RES (solar panels and wind turbines on vessels) to achieve the full energy autonomy of vessels. Indicatively, the proposed actions for the following period could be the following:  Encouraging Port Authorities and Operators to adopt port air quality protection policies against pollution caused by SOx, NOx and particulate matter emissions.  Initiatives to reduce greenhouse gas and carbon emissions caused by port operation. Promoting policies to monitor and reduce emissions into the air associated with key port activities: shipping, cargo operations, freight handling.  Promoting continuous improvement and energy-saving policies in ports, with an emphasis on operational efficiency and clean technologies.  Developing monitoring mechanisms between the Ministry of Maritime Affairs and the Islands and Port Authorities and Operators for setting goals, monitoring performance and reporting on the progress made towards achieving climate change mitigation targets.   224 The purpose of these actions is to analyse and capture the respective general programming plans of the ports and to set specific energy efficiency and climate objectives. At this level and within the next programming period, it is envisaged to develop specialised programmes to support the adoption of such integrated interventions, contributing decisively to the competitiveness of Greek ports. 3.7.3 Policies and measures in tourism 3.7.3.1 Sustainable tourism development and destination management plans  Sustainable tourism development is a key priority for the tourism sector. The development and implementation of an integrated Sustainable Tourism Development Strategy will be the key tool for achieving this goal. In particular, it will support the development of processes for the design and implementation of innovative sustainable tourism policies and new innovative tourism products and tools for sustainable tourism taking into account international practices and their smooth adaptation to local conditions. In any case, the goal is to promote an holistic sustainability concept and to develop local communities and economies. The production of these tourism products and sustainable tourism tools will be complemented by the development of an integrated framework for their evaluation and certification, such as the establishment of Sustainable Tourism Observatories in strategically selected destinations. Moreover, pilot actions to develop management plans and sustainable development of tourist destinations will be implemented to include new destinations in the traffic map, which is a key priority of the strategic development plan. Finally, the development of a Sustainable Destination Management strategy will reinforce the identity of destinations by introducing a new holistic concept that encompasses living landscapes and natural environments, cultural characteristics, the human element, historical identity and local products. In this context, the development of new forms and emerging trends in sustainable thematic tourism, such as the development and interconnection of cultural routes and primary sectors, the development of forms of tourism with an environmental footprint, and sustainable maritime tourism, are important.   225 3.7.3.2 Promoting the use of RES and energy efficiency performance actions in tourist complexes  Financing programmes will be designed and implemented to promote the use of RES for heating, cooling and hot water use, as well as to improve energy efficiency in hotels, tourist accommodation and establishments serving food. Moreover, measures will be designed to install mainly photovoltaic systems through the energy offsetting and virtual energy offsetting scheme. Energy-efficient heating, cooling, ventilation and lighting systems will be introduced into tourist complexes. For the production of thermal and cooling energy in particular, this objective will be achieved by both individual and central systems. In this regard, the potential of installing micro-cogeneration systems will be explored. Emphasis will be placed on the implementation of energy management measures for tourist complexes, and the potential of developing specifications for the installation of energy saving systems in tourist areas possibly for new facilities (e.g. bioclimatic buildings and compliance  Targeted information and awareness programmes will be launched for both tourists and Greek tourism and catering professionals through specific tools, such as the development of targeted energy inspections, the establishment of energy and environmental footprint criteria and reporting on certification and energy signalling schemes. Regarding waste management, pilot social contribution-based recycling programmes will be designed in hotel complexes, with an emphasis on supporting the smooth transition of tourist destinations to an era when plastic use will be prohibited. Moreover, hotel complexes are planned to be supported to participate in solid waste management programmes in cooperation with local municipal cleaning services. In the transport sector, support will be provided for the gradual electrification of tourist areas through pilot actions on public transport and electric bicycles and the installation of charging stations. Finally, the goal of digital sustainable development and destination management will, inter alia, promote active modes of transport, such as walking and cycling.   226 3.7.4 Summary of policy measures Table 25 summarises the policy measures envisaged for the agricultural sector, shipping and tourism.   227 Table 25: Envisaged policy measures for the agricultural sector, shipping and tourism. Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure M1 Use of waste (agri-livestock units and industries, urban)  Waste reduction  RES penetration increase Electricity Regulatory, economic measure M2 Supply chain organisation and land planning of sites for temporary storage of agricultural/forest residual biomass  Waste reduction  RES penetration increase All final consumption sectors Regulatory, technical, economic measure M3 Maintaining and extending the sustainability certification scheme for biofuels, bioliquids and solid fuels  Waste reduction  RES penetration increase Electricity  Heating and cooling  Transport Regulatory measure  Sustainable forest management  Waste reduction  Increase in absorption of GHG emissions All final consumption sectors Regulatory, technical, economic measure  Production of solid biofuels through the promotion of energy crops of woody biomass or coppice plantations  Waste reduction  RES penetration increase Heating and cooling Economic measure  Creation and strengthening of the domestic bioethanol market  RES penetration increase Transport Economic measure  Specific measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the agricultural sector PPN.5 Reduction in GHG emissions Total final energy consumption Regulatory, economic measure   228 Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure  Installation of RES systems through the energy netting and virtual energy netting scheme PPN.5 RES penetration increase Electricity Economic measure  Installation of RES in high productivity land PPN.5 RES penetration increase Electricity Regulatory measure  Promotion of RES systems for heating and cooling PPN.5 RES penetration increase Heating and cooling Economic measure  Boosting the consumption of biofuels  RES penetration increase Heating and cooling Transport Regulatory measure  Improving the energy efficiency of existing machines and installations PPN.5 Improvement in energy efficiency Total final energy consumption Economic measure  Improving the energy efficiency of pumping stations and irrigation systems PPN.5 Improvement in energy efficiency Total final energy consumption Economic measure M14 Provision of information to and training of agricultural professionals PPN.5 Increasing RES penetration and improving energy efficiency Total final energy consumption Information measure  Introduction of fuel consumption obligations with a specific sulphur content and emission control regulatory framework. PPN.1 Reduction in GHG emissions Transport Regulatory measure  Promoting the use of liquefied natural gas. PPN.1 Reduction in GHG emissions Transport Technical, economic measure Regulatory   229 Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure  Development and implementation of infrastructure and a supply chain for the safe bunkering of LNG to ships.  Reduction in GHG emissions Transport Technical, economic, Regulatory measure  Design and integration of local RES units in port areas in the form of self-production. PPN.3 RES penetration increase Electricity Economic measure  Electrification of key energy-consuming installations at ports. PPN.3 Increasing RES penetration and improving energy efficiency Electricity Technical, economic measure  Electrification of ships either during mooring or for inland voyages. PPN.3 Increasing RES penetration and improving energy efficiency Electricity Technical, economic measure  Strengthening local electricity networks at the level of substations. PPN.3 Increasing RES penetration and improving energy efficiency Electricity Technical measure  Development of a regulatory framework for the supply of electricity to ships PPN.3 Increasing RES penetration and improving energy efficiency Electricity Regulatory measure  Actions to improve the energy efficiency of ships and the adoption of energy management systems. PPN.3 Improvement in energy efficiency Total final energy consumption Economic measure   230 Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure  Promoting sustainable tourism development and destination management PPN.7 Supporting sustainable development Total final energy consumption Regulatory, economic measure  Developing innovative tourism products and sustainable tourism tools PPN.7 Supporting sustainable development Total final energy consumption Economic measure  Promoting the use of RES for heating, cooling and domestic hot water PPN.7 RES penetration increase Heating and cooling Economic measure  Promoting actions to improve energy efficiency and energy management measures for tourist complexes.  Improvement in energy efficiency Total final energy consumption Economic measure  Installation of RES systems through the self-generation scheme. PPN.7 RES penetration increase Electricity Economic measure  Development of specifications for the installation of energy-saving systems in tourist areas  Improvement in energy efficiency Total final energy consumption Regulatory measure  Targeted information and awareness programmes for tourists and professionals. PPN.7 Improvement in energy efficiency Total final energy consumption Information measure  Waste management and recycling programmes. PPN.7 Reduction in GHG emissions Total final energy consumption Regulatory, technical, economic measure   231 Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure  Promoting electrification in tourist areas and promoting active modes of transport PPN.7 Increasing RES penetration and improving energy efficiency Electricity Technical, economic measure   