2.7 Research, innovation and competitiveness 2.7.1 Objectives The Greek Research and Innovation System is one of the strengths of the Greek economy, which can further contribute towards solving many problems and ensuring the overall development of the Greek economy. Promoting research and innovation will continue to be a priority in the period 2020-2030, by strengthening important technologies which will contribute to the attainment of all energy objectives. To that end, gross domestic expenditure on research and technological development 83 is expected to double in the period 2017-2030, reaching 0.13% of the GDP in 2030 in the energy-environment sector, compared to 0.06% in 2017. In terms of competitiveness, the indicators preferred for the attainment of the objectives are: Improving energy intensity and greenhouse gas emissions intensity: A key objective to be attained through this indicator is to achieve the gradual decoupling of economic growth from energy consumption and GHG emissions. Improving energy intensity and emissions intensity indicators through the adoption of targeted measures will ensure that this will be the result of the energy efficiency improvement measures to be implemented and will contribute to both reducing energy costs and enhancing the competitiveness of the various economic sectors. This ensures that the positive development of the economic environment and of the various structural factors will not hinder the progress of the overall energy policy objectives and the transition to a low-carbon economy. The penetration of RES in all areas of final energy consumption, the rational management of energy, as well as the use of more energy-efficient devices and processes are the key tools to attain this objective. Reducing energy costs: Reducing energy costs is a key policy priority for making energy products more accessible to all consumers. Measures and policies in the context of this objective will take into account the purchasing power of consumers and their special groups, as well as any specificities related to local characteristics, such as those of remote areas. Maintaining an average cost of energy products below the European consumer average is also the relevant quantitative objective of this energy planning priority. The aim of energy planning is also to adopt measures and policies for specific economic sectors and activities with a high energy footprint and a focus on exports, in order to significantly improve their competitiveness. Increasing the domestic added value of the energy sector: Recognising and ultimately promoting innovative applications and services in the energy sector with high domestic added value is a priority target for the following period, as it contributes positively to the gross domestic product and enhances the sustainability of the energy sector. In addition, this objective also ensures an increase in the number of direct and indirect jobs due to activities in the energy sector. The use of specialised scientific and technical human resources is a core priority of energy planning, and also aims to create and maintain over 60 000 jobs by implementing RES and energy-saving measures and policies. 84 Development plans for the areas that will be affected most by the transition to a low-carbon economy: The challenges faced by lignite-dependent areas for the transition to a low-carbon economy can be tackled with tailored solutions to support structural transformation and accelerate the process of economic diversification and technological transition. The aim is to elaborate a sustainable development strategy plan, focusing on sectors with dynamic prospects in terms of output, employment and income indicators. In this case, local satellite companies of every scale will be mobilised so that every region or local society can reap the benefits of switching to clean energy, new jobs are created and investment in new technologies is promoted. Also, promoting a system for the reallocation of resources from hydrocarbons in order to support local economies that are affected by lignite phase-out in power generation could contribute to the competitiveness of these energy regions in their transition to the new era. 2.7.2 Challenges The more specific technological challenges in research, innovation and competitiveness are supported by a series of measures and correspond to the energy planning objectives. More specifically, the main areas of interest are: I. Use of new RES technologies to meet the needs for generation, transmission, distribution and storage of electricity, to be achieved by:  Continuously increasing the competitiveness of RES energy generation technologies in terms of generation costs.  Increasing the efficiency and flexibility of power plants that use conventional fuels as a consequence of the new role that they have to play in the electricity market and the continuous increase in GHG emission allowance prices.  Increasing the overall needs for electricity system flexibility and energy storage.  Optimally integrating RES technologies in distribution networks in direct connection with consumption, as well as integrating information and communication technologies.   85 II. Use of new RES technologies to meet heating and cooling needs, to be achieved by:  Increasing the competitiveness of heat pumps and of all low-enthalpy technologies in general.  Optimally integrating RES technologies for heating and cooling purposes in the building sector, in particular to the extent that new buildings are to be nearly zero-energy buildings in the following decade.  Ensuring further penetration of solar energy technologies in all uses.  Using biomass efficiently. III. Improvement in energy efficiency, to be achieved by:  Reducing the cost of construction of new buildings and of upgrading existing into nearly zero-energy buildings.  Adopting new technologies and methods of increasing energy efficiency in the tertiary sector, in industry and in the public and broader public sector.  Reducing network losses and optimising network operation.  IV. Transformation of the transport sector, to be achieved by:  Reducing the cost of small-scale electricity storage technologies and of electromobility.  Developing smart infrastructures for electromobility.  Producing second-generation biofuels.  Reducing the cost of all alternative fuels that can be used in transport. V. Reduction in GHG emissions, to be achieved by:  Ensuring the maturation and integration of low-emission technologies in industry, in iron and steel plants in particular.  Ensuring the capture, storage and utilisation of carbon dioxide from power generation plants using conventional fuels and industrial uses.  Applying advanced techniques in rural economy, forests, etc.  Developing integrated consumption management and monitoring tools for residential buildings and business premises, to change the energy consumption pattern and reduce the overall carbon footprint.   86 2.8 Key issues of cross-border interest Key issues of cross-border interest in the fields of energy and climate focus on the transfer of know-how on policies and measures, on the recognition and planning of the implementation of new cross-border energy infrastructures or on enhancing infrastructures already in operation, on cooperation to implement innovative and pilot energy projects, on the functioning of energy markets, on cooperation between information systems, and on cooperation in the context of financing programmes. Their implementation often takes place in the context of cross-border agreements and memoranda of cooperation/understanding. These cross-border partnerships and agreements are planned and finalised in close cooperation and synergy with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.   