77 2.6 Internal energy market 2.6.1 Objectives The qualitative objectives developed at an internal energy market level are broken down into the following main categories: Market integration and competitive energy markets A key reform in restructuring the internal market in electricity consists in reducing domestic lignite-fuelled power generation through the scheduled shutdown of all lignite-fired plants by 2028. Safe and efficient system operation in accordance with the new power generation mix, where RES plants will play a dominant role, will be possible by reorganising the markets in electricity and natural gas and coupling them with those of other Member States. In this direction, Greece is promoting measures to harmonise the domestic markets in electricity and natural gas with the EU directives and regulations on the markets in electricity and natural gas (target model). The coupling of day-ahead markets between Greece and Italy and between Greece and Bulgaria is expected to be launched in the fourth quarter of 2020. The coupling of intraday markets through continuous trading in the region of the Italian border (LIP14) is expected to be launched in the fourth quarter of 2020 (3rdWave). The launch of the coupling of intraday markets through continuous trading will coincide with the launch of regional intraday auctions on the Greece-Italy interconnection and potentially on the Greece-Bulgaria interconnection, whereas the pan-European intraday auctions (IDAs) are expected to be launched in the fourth quarter of 2021. The coupling of the markets will, due to improved energy flows via the interconnections, will help increase the liquidity of the interconnected markets and enable the participation of RES in the cross-border trade in electricity. By participating in the new markets, RES will have the incentive and ability to balance their position closer to real time, thus reducing the needs and the associated costs for reserves and increasing system security. As regards regional coordination for safe system functioning, in November 2019 the Greece-Italy and Greece-Bulgaria-Romania system operators agreed to establish a Thessaloniki-based Regional Security Coordinator, responsible primarily for providing the operators with decision-making and network security support. 78 demand-side participation in the electricity market and to promote the deployment of storage systems that will ensure lower electricity and gas prices and will strengthen RES penetration in the system and adequate system capacity. Please note that Greece, through long-term capacity compensation schemes and by applying interruptibility schemes, aims to encourage demand-side participation in the electricity market in order to reduce energy costs and increase adequate system capacity. At the same time, Greece, by developing a pricing framework, aims to promote the setup of electricity storage systems both in the autonomous systems on non-interconnected islands and in the interconnected system of Greece. The setup of storage systems on non-interconnected islands aims to increase RES penetration in these systems (in addition to the existing 20%) and to neration capacity in order to meet the demand, whereas the setup of storage systems in the interconnected system, in addition to reducing energy costs and increasing adequate capacity, aims to strengthen RES penetration and provide flexibility and ancillary services in the System. More specifically, Greece is promoting the setup of storage systems with RES plants on smaller islands that will retain their autonomous operation by applying pilot modes of operation and using management to achieve RES penetration levels of over 60%, whereas the objective for one of these islands (Agios Efstratios) is to achieve a RES penetration level of more than 85%. In line with the electricity market, Greece also aims to integrate the natural gas market and strengthen the participation of the storage and demand response systems of the gas market, while promoting, through the construction of new cross-border natural gas transport projects, the reorganisation of the gas market, the strengthening of the gas transmission network with new storage tanks and the implementation of market participation policies for large customers in the gas market through demand restraint orders, thus reducing energy costs and increasing adequate capacity and energy in Greece.   79 Electricity interconnectivity Increasing cross-border transmission capacity is necessary for the following reasons:  it contributes significantly to the security of supply;  it is a key factor in the integration of national electricity markets (according to the Barcelona criterion, the minimum electricity import capacity should be at least equal to 10% of the installed generation capacity in each country);  it will allow for the desired high RES penetration in Europe. The average total electricity import capacity was 1 565 MW for 2017, representing an average of 9.3% for 2017, while it is estimated that the 10% target will be reached by 2020. The Greek government is promoting projects to increase the capacity of electricity interconnections to and from the North, both by constructing new transmission lines and strengthening existing ones. These projects are also accompanied by projects for enhancing transmission systems in the broader region of the Balkans, the ultimate objective being to increase the interconnection capacity of the area and meet the target for 2030 (15% interconnectivity) to be attained in accordance with the relevant section of the NECP. Energy transmission infrastructure Greece aims to become an energy hub for both the market in electricity and natural gas. Therefore, Greece is promoting projects, which will be implemented in the following decade, to strengthen its electricity interconnection with neighbouring countries and, at the same time, to connect most of the non-interconnected islands with the mainland system, thus contributing significantly to the integration of the electricity market. Moreover, the interconnection of most of the non-interconnected islands with the system aims at:  increasing reliability in covering the demand for electricity on the interconnected islands at an interconnected system level (Note: Even for large non-interconnected systems, the internationally recommended reliability indicators may be twice worse). It should be noted that reliability is related firstly to adequacy (ability to supply the loads taking into account predictable and unpredictable interruptions), and secondly to system security (ability to withstand disruptions such as short circuits or loss of components);  substituting diesel with other energy sources (in line with the development of the energy mix in the mainland system), resulting in lower generation costs and lower energy 80 dependency (to the extent that the mainland system mix consists mainly of domestic sources);  utilising RES potential on the islands in a more cost-effective way. With regard to the gas market, future projects that will contribute to enhancing the security of supply and the technical adequacy of the national gas system are described in detail in Chapter 3 hereof. In addition to the strategic projects for the transmission of electricity and natural gas, the Hellenic Electricity Distribution Network Operator (DEDDIE) is promoting projects to streamline the remote control of networks all over Greece, the implementation of new customer service systems all over Greece, the optimised management of the electricity systems on the non-interconnected islands etc., while gas network operators and distributors aim to develop and expand the natural gas distribution networks in the Greek territory in order to provide cheap energy to all people. Digitisation of the energy system: The digitisation of the energy system is a prerequisite for the development of properly functioning and competitive domestic energy markets and for the optimal implementation and use of all technological applications and market mechanisms that can be developed in the context of the energy markets. Emphasis will be placed, through the infrastructure projects, information systems, control centres and metering devices that will allow for the complete transition from the current energy system to a fully digitised one, also ensuring secure handling of consumer data. The above procedures will be compatible with all regulatory and statutory provisions in the context of the energy markets. At the same time, the aim is to achieve optimal cooperation between operators in respect of data management, addressing technical issues and developing necessary ancillary services. If producers apply the relevant EU regulation without delay and adopt a single certification and control system, this will also make a significant contribution towards attaining this aim. Addressing energy poverty: Energy poverty has worsened gradually, primarily over the last few years, and therefore addressing it is imperative. The worsening of this phenomenon is mainly due to the economic recession and its impact on people. Indicatively, about 23% of the total population are reportedly unable to heat their homes, while this percentage was 41% in 2017 among the economically vulnerable population. Targeted policy measures will be launched with a view to eliminating the energy poverty of energy-vulnerable households, meeting the 81 anticipated comfort conditions and avoiding the resulting health problems. An environmental objective for all people, both vulnerable and not, is to reduce air pollution, especially in urban centres. The quantitative objective is to reduce by at least 50% the relevant energy poverty footprint by 2025, as well as to reduce it by 75% compared to 2016 and to bring it to levels well below the EU average by 2030. Net metering and active consumer schemes: The contribution of net metering and energy community schemes is twofold, as they will contribute both to the implementation of RES and energy saving investments and to the more active participation of the local community and ultimately to the strengthening of the role of people in energy activities. Achieving a minimum number of projects through these schemes is deemed to be crucial for shaping and assessing the required implementation framework. In this context, the aim is also to develop innovative net metering schemes, both in energy generation and consumption, thus supporting decentralised energy generation and management. The quantitative objective is to set up and operate new autoproduction and net metering systems, primarily with a view to covering own needs of over 600 MW by 2030 (to reach in total more than 1 GW of installed capacity), and to engage aggregators through the possibility of participation of energy communities and of people in energy markets. 2.6.2 Challenges Completing the regulatory framework and implementing the necessary technological infrastructures are prerequisites for launching new electricity markets and coupling them with the other European ones through interconnections. At the same time, measures for proper market functioning, i.e. the existence of liquidity for spot markets, the provision of adequate hedging, the restriction of manipulation and the capability of active consumer participation, are necessary for the successful functioning of the internal market. Developing a mechanism for market monitoring indicators for assessing the level of market concentration through cooperation between the competent bodies is important, while at the same time mechanisms also need to be developed to analyse bidding behaviour and thus detect anti-competitive practices.   82 The digital transformation of the DEDDIE, with a view to being able to respond to the challenge of increased RES penetration, management of decentralised systems for energy generation and storage, and electricity transactions, is pivotal. Congestion management will now be handled through close cooperation between DEDDIE and the Independent Power Transmission Operator (ADMIE), by implementing appropriate infrastructures and mechanisms to ensure mutual network visibility. Network development will take account of the change to the focus of decentralised generation. The development of new financial instruments that are compatible with the new market environment will contribute to the implementation of the required investments. We should also refer at this point to the proposed change to the regulatory framework for incentives for the implementation of such projects, e.g. payment of an additional rate of return on capital costs and/or setting of minimum performance indicators for the attainment of actions and targets. Under the Action Plan for Combating Energy Poverty, it is necessary to assess the implementation of the existing policy measures in order to decide on whether they should be continued, to develop and implement a methodology for selecting the most cost-effective measures and to avoid using the benefits planned for purposes other than combating energy poverty. Moreover, a challenge is to develop effective mechanisms to control and monitor the policy measures in place, including the procedure for verifying beneficiaries. Finally, it is necessary to provide funding mechanisms for the energy upgrading of the residential buildings of energy-vulnerable households and other social groups with specific electricity consumption patterns in the context of autoproduction and net metering schemes.