232 3.8 Research, innovation and competitiveness The definition of policy measures to promote Research, Innovation and Competitiveness in the period 2021-2030 aims to cover eleven different Policy Priorities (PP6.1-PP6.11), which are presented in Figure 10. PP6.1: Innovative applications with a high potential for domestic added value and strengthening of openness of enterprises PP6.2: Development of innovative energy-saving technologies PP6.3: Development of innovative decarbonisation technologies PP6.4: Smart grids PP6.5: Development of innovative technologies in transport and applications for micro-mobility PP6.6: Development of innovative energy storage applications and of CO2 capture, storage and use technologies PP6.7: Promoting innovative technologies to support circular economy actions PP6.8: Implementing horizontal measures to improve the conditions for research PP6.9: Promoting entrepreneurship through research and innovation actions which are part of market functions PP6.10: Optimising support framework and schemes for promoting investment with a view to strengthening competitiveness PP6.11: Strengthening competitiveness by setting up and operating special funds Figure 10: Policy Priorities of policy measures to promote Research, Innovation and Competitiveness in the period 2021-2030. The policy measures that have been specified in the above policy priorities are analysed separately in the following sections.   233 3.8.1 Policies and measures to achieve the relevant objectives 3.8.1.1 Policies and measures to promote research and innovation  Policy measures to promote research and innovation are strongly related to the technologies promoted within the framework of the Energy Union. It should be noted that the aim of research and innovation actions is twofold: on the one hand, to lead to high domestic value added applications and, on the other hand, to enhance business extroversion as a proportion of these applications will be exported to other countries. The energy efficiency improvement objectives set in all areas of end use of energy create significant challenges that, to be addressed, there is an urgent need to step up research into new materials and innovative applications of heating and cooling systems, with an emphasis on improving their reliability and automated operation. At the same time, the maturation and integration of innovative energy-saving technologies that contribute significantly to improving energy efficiency, will be facilitated. In particular, research and innovation activities related to improving the energy efficiency of buildings will include:  New building materials: Innovative materials and building technologies that will support a recycling process, innovative thermal insulation building systems with improved thermal performance, innovative thermal insulation system without materials derived from mineral sources.  Prefabricated active roof and facade elements: Standard panels for ventilated facades or roofs combining photovoltaic and thermal solar systems, thermal insulation, phase change materials, batteries.  Cost-effective, intelligent, flexible heat pumps and high-temperature heat pumps: Intelligent heat pump adjustable to provide additional services to the grid, versatile heat pump to provide a wider operating range and operation control equipment, further development & deployment of absorption technologies and heat pump adsorption systems.  Digital programming and operational optimisation: Automated fault detection and diagnosis, combining statistics and technical data to improve energy demand forecasts and updating-upgrading building assessment methods.   234 Accordingly, the following will be supported in the industrial sector:  Energy-efficient heating and cooling technologies: High temperature compression refrigeration cycle heat pumps with low global warming potential refrigerants for use in industrial medium temperature applications and in district heating and cooling.  Heat/refrigeration recovery: Use of low temperature waste heat to generate electricity at higher efficiency, high temperature waste heat recovery with sCO 2 cycle, hybrid waste heat recovery stations incorporating RES in industrial plants and processes.  Integration of systems: Industrial integration of energy-intensive industries to exploit energy loss streams and better energy management globally, unconventional sources of energy in the manufacturing industry, further integration of digitisation into process and plant management. Specifically for the chemicals and pharmaceuticals sector, provision is made for the (re)design and optimisation of the chemical reactor and process, the development of alternative energy efficient separation technologies and the introduction of electricity into the chemical processes. Achieving the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in all sectors of economic activity is expected to lead both to the full and market-based integration of mature decarbonisation technologies in the energy market and to the gradual penetration of less competitive technologies. This particular transition to a new production and demand model presents significant technological challenges, requiring the development of know-how and the promotion of innovative technologies. In particular, provision is made to support research and innovation on the RES technologies shown in Table 26 in the coming period. Table 26: Research and innovation actions in RES technologies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in all sectors of economic activity. RES technology Research & Innovation Actions Solar thermal energy for electricity generation Implementation of linear concentrating solar power (CSP) collectors technology with storage capacity at a commercial scale. Reduction of the costs and increase of the efficiency of Fresnel CSP linear collectors. Development of new heat storage materials and techniques suitable for CSP systems. Solar thermal energy for heating and Development, standardisation and implementation of hybrid systems in intelligent buildings. 235 cooling applications Digitisation of solar thermal systems - development and experimental production of smart meters, development and demonstration of applications for users and professionals. Work models and pilot applications for the integration of solar thermal systems into smart grids, integrated hybrid RES systems for heating and air-conditioning in buildings with a priority in solar thermal systems. New materials, production methods, solar thermal system parts to ensure cost savings and to be used into integrated systems. Development of standardised solar thermal systems for heat generation in industrial processes. Bioenergy (bio-solids, bio-liquids, bio-gases and bio-energy intermediates) Development of solid, liquid and gaseous bio-energy intermediates through biochemical/thermochemical/chemical conversion from sustainable biomass Demonstration of solid, liquid and gaseous bio-energy intermediates through biochemical/thermochemical/chemical conversion from sustainable biomass Scaling up of solid, liquid and gaseous bio-energy intermediates through biochemical/thermochemical/chemical conversion from sustainable biomass Development of solid, liquid and gaseous bio-energy intermediates through biochemical/thermochemical/chemical conversion from sustainable biomass Wind power (offshore wind farms & small wind turbines) Wind park electrical infrastructures (wind park coupling equipment with network support services, underwater power cables for up to 200m installation and connection to floating wind turbines). Offshore wind farms (pre-industrial fixed-type offshore wind turbines for depths of 50-60m, float type 80-200m depths and floating platform for measurement, floatable wind turbine fastening system for depths of 80-200m, feasibility studies for development of floating wind turbine construction centres). Operation and maintenance of wind farms (data collection-processing system for continuous operational control of wind turbines, software for processing large volumes of data from the operation and maintenance of wind farms and analysis of operating parameters, drones or robotics for control and maintenance of wind turbines, evaluation methodologies for the residual life of wind turbines). Small wind turbines (pre-industrial standards with improved aerodynamic efficiency or low sound footprint, small wind turbine quality control and certification procedures & infrastructures). Other issues (e.g. integrated environmental footprint capture and assessment methodologies-tools, end-of-life management system, feasibility studies and pilot applications for utilising existing lignite 236 infrastructure). Photovoltaic (PV) energy Integration of PV systems into buildings and other infrastructures (new high performance thin film PV cells, hybrid systems incorporating various PV technologies with other power generation technologies, innovative systems for integrating PV in buildings and infrastructure and interconnection with other applications, methods for measuring the efficiency and durability of PVs in real time & in the long term and in accelerated aging conditions). Development of high energy efficient multi-contact technology photovoltaic cells (perovskite technology multi-contact cells deposited on Si/CGIS, new methods and tools for deposition and transport of III/V absorber, GaP deposition techniques on Si, manufacturing techniques for wide-bandgap semiconductors as upper absorbers, adaptation of Si/CGIS technology as lower absorbers, performance test in real conditions). PV plants and facilities monitoring and operating systems (advanced and automated analysis of various databases, standardisation and self-monitoring of sensors, communication of inverters of a PV module and between different PV installations). Deep geothermal energy Geothermal heating in urban areas (harnessing the potential of geothermal fields for urban heating). Materials, methods and equipment to improve operating availability (plastic materials for pipelines and heat exchangers for the 90-temperature range, anti-salinity agents specific to fluids from Greek geothermal fields). Improving the permeability of conventional geothermal reservoirs, with interest from users already exploiting or intending to exploit low enthalpy geothermal fields. Improving electricity conversion efficiency and direct use of heat (hybrid geothermal-biomass power plant, geothermal power plant with cooling water to supply the district heating network). Developing new geothermal potential exploration techniques, including geothermal potential forecasting and exploratory drilling. Integrating geothermal heat and electricity into the energy system (development of a variable load geothermal power plant that will complement wind and PV energy). Developing a zero-emission geothermal power plant. The key priority of research and innovation for the coming period in the field of energy networks are the challenges of digitising them and developing smart grids. The main research and innovation actions to be strengthened in the area of electricity distribution networks are as follows:  237  Creating an innovation environment for the development of smart services: Market planning for the marketing of heterogeneous flexibility products, cyber security of critical energy infrastructure, innovation regulatory zones, process chain for interoperability of ICT systems, systemic and socio-economic impacts of digitisation on the energy system.  Developing an optimised electricity network:  Developing and implementing solutions to increase the observability and controllability of the energy system: Increased observability and controllability of medium and low voltage networks with high penetration of distributed energy resources, smart-flexible design, programming and operation of the network based on improved transmission network observability.  Developing and implementing solutions and tools for load profile management through demand response and control in order to optimise network usage and defer investment in networks: Customer involvement and new markets & business models, EV/PHEV charging infrastructure and integration into smart energy systems, demand response engineering.  Developing and implementing solutions to increase the flexibility of all types of production: Interactions between flexible generation and the power generation system, ancillary services in scenarios with very high RES penetration and low mechanical inertia, increasing flexible production through the use of integrated storage in power plants.  Reducing the cost of all energy storage solutions by minimising the total cost of the system: Multi-service storage applications to facilitate innovative synergies between system administrators and market players, advanced energy storage technologies for energy and power applications.  Developing integrated local and regional energy systems:  Integrating RES at regional and local level, including different energy providers: Optimising the design, management and monitoring of integrated regional energy systems, a transnational joint programming platform for smart, integrated, regional energy systems.  Creating an innovation environment for smart services in collaboration with ICT platform solution providers. 238 In addition, innovative actions relating to electric vehicles and to strategies for their recharging will be supported and emphasis will be placed on the fact that the electricity consumed should come from RES and hydrogen produced by various forms of energy. Similar actions for the development of innovative technologies will also be supported in the case of biofuels as renewable fuels for sustainable transport (fuels for road transport, air transport), which include:  Developing advanced liquid and gaseous biofuels through biochemical/thermochemical/chemical conversion from sustainable biomass and/or autotrophic microorganisms and primary energy from RES.  Demonstrating advanced liquid and gaseous biofuels through biochemical/thermochemical/chemical conversion from sustainable biomass and/or autotrophic microorganisms and primary energy from RES.  Developing other liquid and gaseous fuels (excluding hydrogen) through thermochemical/chemical/biochemical/electrochemical conversion of energy neutral carriers with renewable energy.  Demonstrating other liquid and gaseous fuels (excluding hydrogen) through thermochemical/chemical/biochemical/electrochemical conversion of energy neutral carriers with renewable energy.  Production of renewable hydrogen from electrolysis of water and electricity from RES (installed electrolytes at renewable hydrogen refuelling stations). Actions to design efficient liquefied natural gas storage facilities for bunkering will also be supported. With regard to energy storage, measures will be taken to strengthen the development of new or improved electricity or thermal energy storage technologies with higher efficiency, availability, durability, security and at the lowest cost. Support will be provided for electrochemical energy storage technologies, which relate primarily to RES applications for utilisation in non-interconnected electricity networks or in remote points in the electricity network, in particular:   239  Developing 4.5-5V high-voltage and fully solid state lithium-ion batteries for all vehicle power applications (developing additives or materials modifications to improve safety, determining performance characteristics at low temperatures).  Studying the effect of quick/very quick charging of lithium-ion batteries on materials and battery degradation (understanding phenomena and measuring the effect of high C coefficient on existing and advanced lithium-ion batteries, evaluating progress on quick/very quick chargers: from existing 120 kW to future +300 kW, proposals for measures to reduce cell degradation: changes in materials, thermal management, element and shell design by incorporating optimised thermal management and safety mechanisms, designing appropriate charging stations chilled using coolant).  Progress made on batteries for static energy storage applications: Achieving fixed interfaces for extending the life cycle and lifespan of the systems.  Other battery technologies (after Li-ion) for electromobility: Developing appropriate detection, monitoring, thermal management and security systems.  Li-ion and later Li-ion battery recycling (developing low-cost packaging for secure reverse logistics; developing an improved reverse logistics business model).  Lithium recovery from geothermal brines and sustainable enrichment processes for indigenous lithium deposits in hard rock: Mapping and locating interesting geothermal resources in terms of lithium content.  Enhancing the development of cell and battery production equipment (change in sheet & coating thickness, cost-effectiveness of switching from high-power to high-energy materials, etc.).  Developing hybrid battery systems for static energy storage applications (study of new materials for hybrid systems, design of components and systems specifically for hybrid systems, study of advanced battery management systems for hybrid systems).   240  Second use and smart integration of batteries into the grid (feasibility study for quantification of 2nd life criteria, creation of test protocols according to the 2nd use end application, implementing aging tests to the most promising batteries, developing models to better understand and predict the performance of current and next-generation Li-ion batteries, studying the establishment of a roadmap of convergence from the current situation, suggestions for updating and/or creating a common set of standards, developing proposals for a set of demonstration projects to gain more knowledge and experience of using batteries for EV applications in the Fixed Storage Market, a standardised platform with the key characteristics of the batteries and their components). Promoting research and innovation in the energy sector requires the active involvement of all market players. The strategic choices made by the enterprises in the sector (power transmission and distribution), the policies pursued by public bodies and authorities, as well as the tools for financing the actions implemented by the enterprises should be driven by synergies to the greatest possible extent. Horizontal support policies include:  Establishment of a monitoring and control mechanism to maximise synergies between energy, research and competitiveness policies and support it with the necessary resources.  Regulatory measures for the easier and more efficient implementation of research or pilot projects by all market players, with the ultimate goal of creating benefits for final consumers.  Measures to promote partnerships between all stakeholders by supporting advisory and networking actions among stakeholders to facilitate the transfer of know-how and the maximisation of synergies. Finally, innovative applications will contribute to mitigating the environmental impact of businesses and the impact of climate change on the urban environment, as well as promoting the circular economy, with an emphasis on the recovery of materials and the recovery and reuse of energy, concentrating on the recovery of materials and the recovery and reuse of wasted energy as well as innovative CO2 capture and/or reuse techniques.   241 In the specification and implementation of these policies and measures, there will be close cooperation with national and regional smart specialisation planning and implementation bodies. Energy is already one of the priority areas of the National Smart Specialisation Strategy and certain regional ones. The involvement of energy sector stakeholders in the business discovery process is the key to maximising the intended results. 3.8.1.2 Policies and measures to promote competitiveness  Promoting knowledge-driven entrepreneurship is also a priority by directly contributing to the competitiveness component. To this end, it is planned (a) to set up and operate special funds to promote research and innovation in SMEs, to co-operate with research centres and to ensure the conditions for successful investment, and (b) to exploit patent rights, licensing, etc. Support will also be given to the creation of innovative clusters of companies and research entities to promote healthy entrepreneurship, and to the establishment of knowledge-intensive start-ups for the commercial exploitation of mature research results and innovative ideas, as well as for the development of entrepreneurship support structures, such as incubators, technology parks, co-working spaces, etc. Enhancing competitiveness calls for improving the existing regulatory framework for the implementation of investments in industrial plants and in SMEs, in order to create a stable and transparent framework of rules, procedure and administrative structures with a view to completing smoothly large public and private projects. In addition, in order to ensure more private capital, the effectiveness of the existing private investment aid schemes will be assessed in order to continue implementing the most efficient among them and/or to attempt to implement new ones. The role of special target funds will also be important for facilitating the provision of concessional financing to SMEs and for undertaking part of the business risk which is not undertaken by financing institutions, while providing the necessary guarantees. The contribution of circular economy to improving competitiveness is considered to be particularly important and it is, therefore, necessary to promote concrete actions focusing on the development of innovative technologies to achieve the objectives of the National Circular Economy Strategy.   242 3.8.2 Cooperation with other Member States in this area Cooperation with other countries in the area of research and innovation is shaped by the transnational collaborations of the GSRT, which are an integral part of its overall activity in making and strengthening research policies. These collaborations cover a wide range of bilateral, tripartite and multilateral actions as a result of the countrythe joint will of the governments involved. The forms of multilateral cooperation vary from cooperation at ministerial level (e.g. Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation) or collaborations, initially decided at ministerial level and implemented by researchers/scientists (e.g. ERANETS). The Territorial Cooperation Programmes  Interreg for the period 2021-2027 will be used to promote cooperation with other Member States in the field of energy and climate. 3.8.3 Financing of measures in this area at national level, inter alia with EU support and the use of EU funds The key financial instruments include:  Domestic resources  Operational programmes under the new programming period  Specific operational funds with public and private capital  National, European, transnational and international programmes to support research actions and the implementation of innovative and pilot applications 3.8.4 Summary of policy measures Table 27 summarises the policy measures envisaged to achieve individual objectives as part of the research, innovation and competitiveness dimension.   243 Table 27: Contemplated policy measures to promote Research, Innovation and Competitiveness. Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure M1 Development of innovative energy-saving technologies PP6.1, PP6.2 Promotion of research and innovation Energy efficiency, Consumer-focused smart energy system RES Economic measure M2 Development of innovative decarbonisation technologies, as well as applications for carbon capture, storage and utilisation PP6.1, PP6.3 Promotion of research and innovation Development of low-carbon technologies RES Carbon capture, use and storage Economic measure M3 Smart grids PP6.1, PP6.4 Promotion of research and innovation Consumer-focused smart energy system Economic measure  Promotion of innovative technologies in transport PP6.1, PP6.5 Promotion of research and innovation Development of low-carbon technologies Sustainable transport Economic measure  Development of innovative energy storage applications PP6.1, PP6.6 Promotion of research and innovation Sustainable transport Consumer-focused smart energy system Economic measure  Implementation of horizontal measures for improving the conditions for conducting research PP6.8 Promotion of research and innovation All NECP subject fields Regulatory measure   244 Numbering Name of policy measure Correlation with policy priorities Target Sector affected Category of measure  Promotion of entrepreneurship through research and innovation actions which are embedded in market functions PP6.9 Improvement of competitiveness All NECP subject fields Economic measure  Optimising support framework and schemes for promoting investment with a view to strengthening competitiveness PP6.10 Improvement of competitiveness All NECP subject fields Economic measure  Strengthening competitiveness through the establishment and operation of Special Target Funds PP6.11 Improvement of competitiveness All NECP subject fields Economic measure  Promoting innovative circular economy technologies PP6.1, PP6.7 Improvement of competitiveness All NECP subject fields Regulatory, economic measure   