  2.5. Dimension of research, innovation and competitiveness i. National objectives and funding targets for public and, where available, private research and innovation relating to the Energy Union, including, where appropriate, a time-frame for when the objectives are to be met The Government of Hungary is committed to the innovative reform of the energy sector. A key objective is to increase energy RDI output and to maximise economic development opportunities offered by energy innovation and climate change. The Government has initiated broad sectoral dialogue to survey the innovation potential. Based on the new National Energy Strategy  drawn up within the framework of and in parallel with the NECP, and adopted by the Government simultaneously with the NECP  Hungary assigns a priority to determining the directions of energy innovation, the implementation of supporting regulatory changes and in the creation of financing opportunities for innovative projects. Within the framework of the new energy innovation strategy Hungary plans to encourage use of innovative solutions that ensure the smooth transformation of the electricity markets based on electrification, decentralisation and digitalisation, on the one hand, and contribute to fulfilling objectives relating to the expansion of consumer choices, the strengthening of the security of supply and the climate-friendly transformation of the energy sector, on the other. Innovation in the energy sector should also support the performance of the Hungarian economy, increase national RDI capacities and create industrial development opportunities to the extent possible. ii. Where applicable, national objectives relating to the year 2050, supporting the spread of clean energy technologies, and national objectives - including long-term targets (for 2050) - relating to the introduction of low CO2 emissions technologies, including decarbonising technologies for energy-intensive and carbon-intensive industrial sectors, and to the related CO2 transport and storage infrastructure iii. Where applicable, national objectives relating to competitiveness Hungary assigns a priority to strengthening the framework of qualitative growth and to further enhancing Hungary's innovation-driven competitiveness; these efforts will result in more successful enterprises, more jobs, greater added value, and ultimately in a higher standard of living and a better quality of life. Hungary's characteristics offer a favourable background for establishing innovation-driven competitiveness. By building on the Hungarian undertakings playing a leading role in the manufacture of electrical machinery, the automotive industry and in IT solutions, Hungary will not only be a user of new technology, but could become an active player on the innovative energy market. 