3.5. Dimension Research, Innovation and Competitiveness i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.5 Research, Innovation and Competitiveness:  Competitive funding rounds to promote research and innovation to meet the climate challenge   157  Recognition of the need to ensure that the best scientific evidence and advice is available to underpin Government policy and support the actions in this plan  Strengthen delivery of pdecarbonisation objectives and open up new economic opportunities  development and demonstration investments and activities in Ireland over the coming years  Support the ocean energy research, development, and demonstration of floating wind, tidal, and wave technologies, including maximising supply chain and enterprise opportunities  Develop a national policy framework for district heating, which covers the key areas of regulation, planning, financing and research  Undertake further research to assess the potential to sequester, store and reduce emissions of carbon through the management, restoration and rehabilitation of peatlands  Further development of research and innovation infrastructure relevant to the energy and climate action sectors  Examine sectoral coherence, network and awareness raising, research and innovation and the circular bioeconomy potential of harnessing the value from side-streams from both agriculture and forestry  A greater focus on research into land diversification in agricultural colleges, the EPA and Teagasc, to help educate farmers on the benefits of diversification  Systematically develop economic opportunities associated with decarbonisation through research and innovation, enterprise hubs, and skill development at both national and regional level  Commission research on the impact of the transition on specific sectors (jobs or roles), regions, communities and cohorts of citizens The benefits to Ireland from joining the Mission Innovation Initiative are currently under consideration by DCCAE and a decision will be made in due course. Ireland has strong connections with our international energy research & innovation counterparts through energy research & innovation programmes run by the European Commission (such as Horizon 2020/Horizon Europe, ERA-NET Partnerships etc.) and through several   158 International Energy Agency Committees in which DCCAE and SEAI participate or facilitate participation. Therefore, we are in the strong position to evaluate the benefits of Ireland joining Mission Innovation, in consultation with countries who have developed some experience of the initiative to-date. Ireland takes a technology agnostic approach when funding energy RD&D. General prioritisation of areas to be funded is decided on the basis of an exercise run by the Department of Business, Enterprise & Innovation (which focuses on all sectors of the economy) and also an annual Cross-Government consultation which is run by the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) (which focuses specifically on the energy sector and its connections to other sectors). This coordinated approach ensures that energy research funding is highly targeted. Funding is available to all relevant areas, and recent research projects include those in areas such as: bioenergy, wind energy, ocean energy, carbon capture & storage (CCS), smart grids, hydrogen, solar energy, energy in transport, energy in agriculture, energy efficiency, renewable energy and ICT for energy.  The SEAI National Energy RD&D Funding Programme seeks to grow national capacity in energy research such that researchers in academia and industry are well placed to compete for national non-domain specific R&D funding and are in a position to be international thought leaders and actors (through, for example, thought leadership within relevant domains, playing leadership roles in International Energy Agency activities, and leading & participating in international collaborative initiatives such as Horizon 2020). Increased and sustained investment will help to ensure that companies and research performing organisations in Ireland are encouraged and enabled to invest time and resources in performance of energy RD&D, resulting in skilled and experienced researchers in the energy domain being developed and retained in Ireland. ities is to coordinate Irish energy research, lead and support excellent research, development, demonstration & innovation activities, to be at the forefront of knowledge generation relevant to the energy sector, and to promote its application in policy and practice. SEAI Research & Innovation funding is invested in projects at the following stages/for the following purposes: applied research, research for practice, research for policy, development, and demonstration projects in the energy domain. SEAI funding is primarily invested in companies, universities, institutes of technology, research institutions, semi state bodies and public bodies.  Climate science aspects of the Environmental Protection Agency Research Programme aim to provide:    159  Advanced analysis of GHG emissions and removals, enabling improved policy development and decision making  Research based information in support of risk and vulnerability analysis and adaptation actions in Ireland  Solutions to achieve our 2020 targets and to identify and test solutions for achievement of societal and economic low carbon transformation to 2050.  Information on pathways for achievement of highest air quality standards in Ireland and advance integrated assessment of air pollution, short life climate forcers, and other wider environmental issues  Domain agnostic funders of research in Ireland also have an important part of play in the energy & climate research ecosystem in Ireland. Enterprise Ireland, the Irish Research Council and Science Foundation Ireland are part of a broader network which supports energy & climate research in Ireland - the focus of the Irish Research Council and Science Foundation Ireland is primarily on early stage research, whilst the focus of Enterprise Ireland is primarily on supporting businesses in the manufacturing and internationally traded services sectors. DBEI provides funding for the Disruptive Technologies Innovation fund, action and sustainability. The Future Jobs initiative is being developed jointly by the Department of Business, Enterprise and Innovation and the Department of the Taoiseach and was launched in 2019. This initiative will emphasise building resilience through improving productivity especially among Irish small and medium enterprises (SMEs); enhancing skills levels and increasing participation in the labour force; preparedness for, and exploitation of, anticipated transformational changes arising from technological developments and the transition to a low carbon and digital economy. ii. Where applicable, co-operation with other Member States in this area, including, where appropriate, information on how the SET Plan objectives and policies are being translated to a national context North Seas Energy Co-operation (NSEC)  Ireland works in the NSEC on the prioritisation for the offshore research agenda and according SET plan funds     160 National Energy RD&D Funding Programme and SET Plan Objectives  The National Energy RD&D and Ocean Energy Prototype Development Funding Programmes fund the deployment of research, development & demonstration stage energy/low-carbon technology pilot facilities. This funding aims to stimulate and accelerate the development & deployment of energy/low-carbon technology related capacity to carry out internationally leading RD&D activities; and to support solutions that enable technical & other barriers to market uptake of energy/low-carbon technology related products, processes & systems to be overcome. Through individual SET-Plan Implementation Groups, research calls are aligned with SETPlan priorities. This enables alignment of national research priorities with research and innovation programmes both at EU level and across other member states. This also increases co-operation between national programmes to avoid duplication of research. Ireland and the International Energy Agency (IEA)  Ireland participates in extensive international collaboration on technology-related issues associated with the low-carbon transition via the IEA Technology Collaboration Programmes. Ireland is a signatory for eight IEA Technology Collaboration Programmes (TCPs). The scope and strategy of TCPs to which Ireland is a signatory align with national strategic objectives related to renewable energy, climate change and coordination of energy-related research  Ireland is represented on IEA Standing Groups and Committees (e.g. the IEA Governing Board, IEA Committee on Energy Research & Technology; IEA Standing Group on Long-Term Co-operation; IEA Standing Group on Emergency Questions; IEA Standing Group on Global Energy Dialogue;) and Working Parties which, inter represented on relevant IEA TCP Executive Committees  Ireland is signatory to eight IEA Technology Collaboration Programmes. The scope and strategy of these TCPs aligns with our strategic objectives related to renewable energy, climate change and coordination of energy-related research. A national call for appointment of experts to TCP tasks in 2018 was undertaken, under a new structured approach for Irish engagement with IEA TCPs. Additional calls for experts, facilitated by this new structured selection process, are expected in subsequent years   161 iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds The National Energy RD&D and Ocean Energy Prototype Development Funding Programmes aim to stimulate and accelerate the development and deployment of energy/low-carbon technology related products, processes and systems in the Irish marketplactivities; and to support solutions that enable technical and other barriers to market uptake of energy/low-carbon technology related products, processes and systems to be overcome. support the development of jobs and enterprise opportunities associated with the low carbon transition. The EPA Research Programme includes a specific strand on climate science research in Ireland, recognising the need for research to inform a practical response to, and strategic engagement on, climate change. The EPA has a statutory role in coordinating environmental research in Ireland. EPA Research has a strong focus on policy and is driven by national to be awarded in 2019 and 2020. Domain agnostic funders of research in Ireland also have an important part to play in the energy and climate research ecosystem in Ireland. Enterprise Ireland, the Irish Research Council and Science Foundation Ireland are part of a network which supports energy & climate research in Ireland - the focus of the Irish Research Council and Science Foundation Ireland is primarily on early stage research, whilst the focus of Enterprise Ireland is primarily on supporting businesses in the manufacturing and internationally traded services sectors. d development. It has a -nuclear energy research for the period 2014-2020. Irish industry, academia and public sector bodies participate in Horizon 2020 with SEAI fulfilling the role of National Delegate for Societal Challenge 3 (Secure, Clean and Efficient Energy). The Report of the independent High Level Group on maximising the impact of EU Research & Innovation Programmes (European Commission, 2017) calls for a prioritisation of research and innovation in EU and national budgets and for a doubling of the EU research and innovation programme budget, from -related RD&D funding from Horizon 2020 during the first half of the programme.    162 The EPA fulfils the role of National Delegate and National Contact Point for Societal Challenge 5 of the Horizon 2020 Work Programme. Researchers based in Ireland won  funding from Societal Challenge 5 of the Horizon 2020 Programme, - climate action, environment, resource efficiency and raw materials. These awards are across 9 research institutions.  Ireland also participates in several energy and climate related ERA-Nets and Joint Programme Initiatives (JPIs), including the Smart Energy Systems ERA-Net; Ocean ERA-Net; the Climate JPI and the LIFE Programme.   