2.3. Dimension Energy Security i. The elements set out in point (c) of Article 4 Gas & Electricity Ireland has a small population base and consequently a high cost per capita to fund infrastructure. Its peripheral location at the end of the European electricity and gas grids, with relatively high dependence on imported gas from the UK, low import route diversity for gas, potential increasing role of gas in the energy mix for heat, transport and power generation, including as a back-up for intermittent power generation, means that our energy security profile is different to most other Member States. Following the exit of the UK from the EU, we will no longer be physically connected to the EU Internal Energy Market (IEM).  by 2025. While this will have a positive impact on greenhouse gas and other harmful emissions, it will lead to an increased reliance on natural gas thus reducing the diversification of our fuel mix and impacting on security of supply.  electricity systems is being carried out. The focus of the review is the period to 2030 in the context of ensuring a sustainable pathway to 2050. The outcome of this review will inform the relevant polices and measures.  :  Maintain and, where necessary, facilitate the enhancement of resilience of the gas overall climate and energy objectives    49  Based on the outcome of the review, put in place policies and measures to address potential constraints or supply interruptions  Increase and diversify the indigenous production of clean energy sources, in particular the development of large offshore wind projects  Facilitate, as a preference, commercial investment through policy and regulatory certainty  Maintain close co-operation on security of supply at EU and regional level, in particular continued co-operation with the UK  Ensure that measures are aligned with national and EU climate policy objectives;  Actively participate in EU Project of Common Interest (PCI) process including overall climate and energy objectives  Oil Given that the Irish oil market is characterised by a lack of indigenous oil production, with no commercially viable finds having been discovered there is limited scope for reducing petroleum import dependency in the short to medium term. oil industry is fully privatised and largely de-regulated with the origin of imports being determined by cost and logistical factors. Petroleum Economy states that existing licences are not affected by the decision to cease exploration for oil and they can continue towards exploration and production for both oil and/or gas as per their existing terms. Our objectives regarding oil are to:  Provide a policy and regulatory framework to facilitate the commercial oil companies in their supplying of product to the domestic market  Facilitate the continued operation of sufficient infrastructure to import and supply oil to the market place  Support renewable and sustainable alternatives to petroleum products, including electric vehicles, biofuels and CNG in transports  Continue to engage in oil emergency planning, including the measures specified below Cybersecurity   50  The Commission Recommendation (EU) 2019/553 provides non exhaustive guidance to Member States and relevant stakeholders, in particular network operators and technology suppliers, for achieving a higher level of cybersecurity in view of the specific real time requirements identified for the energy sector, cascading effects and the combination of legacy and state of the art technologies. The guidance aims at helping stakeholders keep in mind the specific requirements of the energy sector when implementing internationally recognised cybersecurity standards. The recommendation calls on Member States to ensure the relevant stakeholders take the necessary measures and encourage them to build up knowledge and skills related to cyber security in energy. While dialogue on cyber security in the energy sector is mainly through the NIS Co-operation Group (Network and Information Systems Directive) the Commission provides regular updates to DCCAE and the Regulator through meetings of the Gas Coordination Group and Electricity Coordination Group. Co-operation on crisis management is fundamental to cyber security. Operators of Essential Services in the energy sector are advised to follow the recommendation and consider cybersecurity in regional/national risk assessments under EU Regulation 2017/1938 for security of gas supply and under EU Regulation 2019/942 for security of electricity supply. The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) having due regard to the recommendation is working with providers of critical national infrastructure to improve the overall level of cybersecurity in the energy sector. The NCSC have developed cyber security guidance which provides a framework in alignment with international standards for cybersecurity, from which critical infrastructure providers can adopt a risk management culture to safeguard the protection and resilience of critical services.  The NCSC is actively engaging with providers to develop communication channels within the energy sector to facilitate collaboration between key stakeholders. Incident guidance levels have been published to assist providers in the reporting of incidents, which can aid the sector in the prevention, detection and management of incidents. In its ongoing engagement with stakeholders, the NCSC will proactively seek to continually improve the cyber security maturity level within the sector.  The current National Cyber Security Strategy was published in December 2019, and follows on from the country's first Strategy which was published in 2015. It is a broader and more comprehensive document than the last one, and takes advantage of the operational experience gained by the National Cyber Security Centre from 2015 to 2019, and from ongoing national and international engagements in the area.    51 The vision behind the 2019 Strategy is to allow Ireland to continue to safely enjoy the benefits of the digital revolution and to play a full part in shaping the future of the Internet. Some of the key objectives of the strategy are to continue to improve the ability of the State and to identify and protect critical national infrastructure by increasing its resilience to cyber-attack and by ensuring that operators of essential services have appropriate incident response plans in place to reduce and manage any disruption to services. ii. National objectives with regard to increasing: the diversification of energy sources and supply from third countries for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems In relation to natural gas, Ireland has a number of challenges including a high import dependency, a lack of import route diversity, and a declining indigenous gas supply. In addition, Ireland has a small synchronous island electricity system and envisaged increasing integration of renewable energy sources for heat, transport and power generation, including intermittent renewable sources. Given the above, our objectives are to:  Ensure that there is sufficient flexibility in the energy system to maintain energy security of supply and facilitate the integration and transition to clean energy sources in the most cost effective way   Support further electricity interconnection to improve the functioning and flexibility of the national energy system  Support projects which are needed for energy security and consistent with national and EU climate policy objectives, through the EU Projects of Common Interest process and EU funding mechanisms In relation to oil, there is no substantial domestic production of biofuels or other alternative fuels, and therefore as things stand, little alternative to the continued import of petroleum products. The sourcing of oil products is largely determined by pricing and logistics considerations. Crude oil is sourced mainly from Norwegian North Sea production and product is currently imported primarily from UK refineries, in particular from Vat Pembroke.  product imported from UK refineries. However, given that gasoline and kerosene imported from UK refineries may be liable for tariffs, it is possible that the importing oil companies may seek more competitively priced product from EU refineries. As things stand, some diesel is imported from elsewhere, including the Russian Federation and the Gulf Coast of the United   52 States. Ireland will continue to ensure the oil industry has the flexibility to obtain sufficient oil supplies of the necessary quality and will:  Continue to utilise European and international standards for petroleum products, through its membership of by the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN)  Continue to enforce fuel quality standards by confirming quality compliance and specifying instances of non-compliance periodically to the Commission under Article 8 of the Fuel Quality Directive  iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to reducing energy import dependency from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems  high and increasing reliance on gas for electricity, our low import route , which is likely to increase as the Corrib gas field progressively depletes, and the potential increasing role of gas in the energy mix for heat, transport and power generation including as a back-up for intermittent power generation, our objectives are to:  Ensure the resilience of the gas network to a long-duration supply disruption, in the context of EU and national climate objectives;  Actively participate in EU and regional initiatives to maintain and enhance security of supply including national, regional and EU co-operation on emergency planning and response for gas and electricity networks, including risk assessments, preventative plans and emergency plans;  Following the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU, engage with our EU partners to put in place an EU/UK framework for continued necessary regional co-operation between Ireland and the UK on matters related to gas and electricity security of supply, including emergency preparedness and response and solidarity in an emergency situation.  iv. National objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular by means of deploying domestic energy sources, demand response and energy storage Given that Ireland has a small synchronous Island electricity system, and the envisaged increasing integration of renewable energy sources for heat, transport and power generation, including intermittent renewable sources, our objectives are to:   53  Ensure, in the most cost effective way, that there is sufficient flexibility in the energy system to maintain energy security of supply and facilitate the integration and transition to clean energy sources  Support further electricity interconnection to improve the functioning and flexibility of the national energy system Ireland currently has no indigenous oil supplies and as things stand limited domestic production of sustainable fuels. All oil imports are transported by sea and placed on the market through an oil terminal. Taking this vulnerability into account, Ireland will continue to maintain existing policy measures and develop additional capacity to deal with an oil supply emergency, including:  stored in Ireland or within the EU, as required by EU legislation and IEA rules;  Continued regional co-operation with Northern Ireland to ensure sufficient import capacity in the event of prolonged infrastructure disruption  Continued development of demand restraint measures aimed at reducing oil usage during a prolonged emergency, in particular in the transport sector  Further development of policy around Government intervention to ensure the supply of oil to critical infrastructure and for societal need, if required 