50% of the amount of funding as an estimate of the proportion that went to heating rather than food support. Petroleum Infrastructure Support Group: Annual contributions to this fund are made by companies with licences for hydrocarbon exploration and development activities off the Irish coast. The fund is administered by the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment and its aims are to enhance understanding of the relatively underexplored Irish offshore through funding of new research and data collection activities. the tax that they pay on diesel purchased for use in the course of business. As a first step in relation to plans to phase-out energy subsidies, the Climate Action Plan commits to model the impacts, both in terms of the economy and in terms of emissions, of removing fossil fuel subsidies. 5.  5.1. Impacts of planned policies and measures described in section 3 on energy system and GHG emissions and removals, including comparison to projections with existing policies and measures (as described in section 4) i. Projections of the development of the energy system and GHG emissions and removals as well as, where relevant of emissions of air pollutants in accordance with Directive (EU) 2016/2284 under the planned policies and measures at least until ten years after the period covered by the plan (including for the last year of the period covered by the plan), including relevant Union policies and measures -2030 is based on two scenarios  a baseline (With Existing Measures) and an advanced polices and measures scenario (With Additional Measures) as follows:   223 With Existing Measures (WEM)  a low oil price (constant 2016 prices) scenario based on e of December 2018 are modelled in this scenario. With Additional Measures  a low oil price (constant 2016 prices) based on the same BEIS price projections as included in the WEM scenario with a varying carbon tax that increases  Total Primary Energy Demand Projections for the total primary energy demand trajectories in for the WEM and WAM scenarios are presented in Figure 21, facilitating a quantitative examination of the impacts of planned policies and measures.   Figure 21: Total primary energy requirement by scenario Notable observations when comparing total primary energy demand trajectories are:  A divergence in trends from 2020 onwards resulting in almost 18% less primary energy demand in the WAM scenario in 2030. The divergence in primary energy -on-   224  In the WAM scenario primary energy demand falls year-on-year from 2020-2030, however projected trends post 2030 suggest that without a further increase in the carbon tax and ongoing policy impacts post-2030 demand could again increase in both scenarios. This is an outcome of modelled macroeconomic and population growth in the absence of Government policy. It is not anticipated that Government policy will cease in 2030, however only stated Government policy to 2030 has been modelled here   Additional policy measures in the WAM scenario contributing to a divergence in  o Increased biofuels blending and more electric vehicles in transport. o A higher level of RES-E achievement (70% by 2030 in the WAM, whereas 55% by 2030 in the WEM), primarily met by more onshore and offshore wind installed capacity o Additional supports for the deployment of heat pumps and greater ambition in national energy efficiency programmes Total Primary Energy Demand by Fuel Projections for the total primary energy demand by fuel trajectories in for the WEM and WAM scenarios are presented in Figures 22 and 23.  Oil Oil demand falls by a third (in absolute terms) in the WAM scenario, but still dominates the fuel mix in 2030, accounting for 35% of total primary energy demand. The majority of oil demand is for the transport sector, which shows strong growth in both scenarios in line with economic growth projected to 2030.  The increasing carbon tax in the WAM results in a slower transport energy demand growth relative to the fixed carbon tax, with 24% less transport energy demand by 2030 in the WAM. The impact of greater numbers of electric vehicles in the WAM scenario (936,363 by 2030) also contributes to a fall in oil demand post-2025, as electric drive trains are more efficient than internal combustion vehicles.  Even though aviation is included in the Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) since 2013, the increasing carbon tax in the WAM scenario leads to a fall in aviation transport demand through less consumer spending. By 2030, there is a fifth less aviation transport in the WAM scenario relative to the WEM scenario.   225 Oil use for space-heating in the residential sector declines further in the WAM scenario relative to the WEM, due to a proposed ban on oil boilers from 2022, the deployment of heat pumps, as well as greater and deeper energy efficiency upgrades in buildings.  In industry and services, the deployment of biomass energy and heat pumps also reduces the dependency on oil products and account for a further fall in oil demand in the WAM scenario relative to the WEM, beyond the impact of the varying carbon tax. A detailed policy package will be defined for the post-2030 period at a future date. Due to continued economic and population growth post-2030 modelled, without any reductions for the impact of future Government intervention post-2030, primary energy trends are observed to increase here. This is not an anticipated outcome, but only illustrative of a scenario without ongoing policy effort post 2030.    Figure 22: Total primary energy requirement by fuel (WEM)    226  Figure 23: Total primary energy requirement by fuel (WAM) Gas The second most dominant primary energy fuel is natural gas, accounting for just over a third of all demand in both the WEM and WAM scenarios in 2030. Oil and natural gas together account for almost 70% of total primary energy requirement in 2030 in the WAM scenario, down from a 79% share in the WEM scenario due to the additional policies and measures included in the WAM.  The overall total primary energy demand for natural gas is projected to grow from 2020 to 2030, in both scenarios. However, between 2025 and 2030 the demand for gas increases in the WEM scenario but falls in the WAM scenario.  Over half of all natural gas is used for electricity generation and currently just over half of all electricity generated is from natural gas power plants. However, a greater contribution of variable renewables to electricity generation and more interconnection in the WAM scenario sees the natural gas demand for inputs into electricity generation and the share of electricity generated fall in the WAM scenario. There is 20% less gas input to electricity generation in the WAM scenario. Solid Fossil Fuels Coal and peat are mostly used for electricity generation in Ireland. Coal-fired generation is due to cease in 2025 in the WEM scenario and a year earlier in the WAM scenario, driven by   227 market forces. In the WEM scenario, post-2020 there is peat use in electricity generation with biomass cofiring until 100% biomass generation from 2028. It should be noted however, the recent announcement of the closure of two of the three existing peat plants at the end of 2020 sees earlier displacement of peat in electricity generation in the WAM scenario.  Both coal and peat are likely to continue to be used for residential space heating in a low energy price environment, albeit with ever diminishing absolute consumption. While the increasing carbon tax alone results in 13% less coal and 6% less peat in the WAM scenario, the impact of additional energy efficiency and renewable energy policies and measures results in a more significant fall in demand. In the WAM scenario residential sector, an overall 69% drop in coal demand and a 64% drop in peat demand over the decade 2020 to 2030 is observed. Import Dependency The overall dependency on fossil fuels does not fall below 76% of total primary energy demand in the WEM to 2030. The impact of additional planned policies and measures reduces that dependency to approximately two thirds of or 65% total primary energy demand in the WAM scenario by 2030.  In terms of import dependency, all crude oil and oil products are imported in Ireland. Similarly, all coal used in Ireland is imported. Ireland currently produces approximately 60% of the natural gas primary energy demand, but in the absence of another gas field coming on stream, that rate will decline annually to 2030, and with increasing gas demand, only a fifth (20%) of all natural gas is projected to be indigenous by 2025. The majority of biofuels for transport are also currently imported a trend that is also likely to continue if the absence of planned development of the industry in Ireland. While peat is an indigenous energy source, its usage is projected to fall amid growing environmental concerns and the expected closure of two of the three peat-fired power plants at the end of 2020.  Ireland has significant resources of variable renewable energy sources  such as wind, ocean energy and, to a lesser extent, solar. Indigenous combustible renewables include some sources of biomass, biogas, the renewable portion of municipal solid wastes (MSW) and solid recovered wastes, landfill gas and sewage sludge gas.  The current share of biomass resources for energy that are imported is 37% and this is expected to fall to 17% in the WAM scenario by 2030, with the assumption that domestic forestry, agricultural residues and waste resources are harnessed for growing demands in heat and transport. Despite the projected growth in indigenous biomass consumption   228 through heat supply and biofuel blending, the overall energy import dependency is likely to lie between 65% and 76% by 2030, where the former relates to the WAM scenario. Exports An interesting recent trend is that since 2016 Ireland is now a net exporter of electricity. This trend is likely to continue throughout the period projected with greater exports in the WAM scenario measures - which has greater renewable electricity generation and interconnection. Electricity Generation and Demand Figures 24 and 25 show how the electricity demand projected is an amalgamation of a macro-economic demand projected and the net effect of:  Additional modelled demand growth from data centres and large industrial users  Additional policy driven demand such as heat pumps, electric vehicles, LUAS and metro   Modelled demand savings from electricity demand-side efficiency savings and smart meter savings It should be noted that the heat pump demand shown in the graphs below is additional heat pump demand net of electricity displaced from the housing mix with counterfactual electric heating. Two broad factors are at play between the WEM and WAM scenario for electricity generation and demand, namely: the higher carbon tax and the increased policy ambition in WAM.  The higher carbon tax in the WAM scenario drives down the base macro-economic electricity demand projected compared to WEM, due to the macro-economic effect of a higher consumer price  On the other hand, there is increased additional demand contributions in WAM from electric vehicles and heat pumps due to increased ambition for these policies. Albeit, the increased demand is somewhat offset by increased efficiency ambition in WAM Capacity Statement 2019 -2028 is assumed in both WEM and WAM scenarios. Despite the increased demand contributions for electric vehicles and additional heat pumps in WAM, the amalgamated electricity demand projected for WAM is slightly less than the WEM scenario. This is driven in part by the higher efficiency gains in WAM but also the impact of the higher carbon tax in giving a lower base macro-economic demand projected for WAM.   229  Figure 24: Electricity demand projected (WEM)    Figure 25: Electricity Demand Projected (WAM)   230 The gross electricity demand projections are input to a PLEXOS electricity system model, which outputs the generation plant mix likely to be dispatched to meet that demand. The generation projections for WEM and WAM are shown in Figures 26 and 27.  A number of observations between the two scenarios can be made:  Despite lower electricity demand input into the WAM scenario, there is marginally more electricity generated in the WAM. This is driven by higher electricity exports arising from the greater share of renewable electricity (70% by 2030) and increased interconnection in WAM  A low oil price environment results in declining generation from coal from 2020 onwards, as it is pushed out by a small differential between coal and gas price and an increased ETS carbon price. By 2025, coal is no longer used for electricity generation in both scenarios  There is continued peat-fired plant operation out to 2030 in the WEM scenario, with an assumed increasing ratio of co-firing across the decade and the ending of firing with peat by 2028 as included in Irelanassumptions are in line with recent (December 2019) closure announcements for two of the three peat-fired plants at the end of 2020  In the WAM scenario, battery storage (included with pumped storage in the figures) provides increased flexibility with additional battery capacity from 2025 onwards.   The remaining difference between the scenarios relates to the ratio of shares of renewables and gas. The WAM scenario has a higher RES-E policy ambition and so, consequently, has a greater share of renewables and more displaced gas generation than WEM. In absolute terms, 20% less gas is used for electricity generation in the WAM scenario  Beyond 2030, the ratio of shares between gas and renewables is maintained, as it is assumed that RES-E share is maintained post 2030 (in the absence of modelled policy support post 2030)     231  Figure 26: Electricity generation by fuel (WEM)   Figure 27: Electricity generation by fuel (WAM)     232 Total Final Energy Demand The impacts of planned policies and measures on total final energy demand can be observed in Figure 28 comparing the trajectories for WEM and WAM scenarios. Some notable observations when comparing the aggregate impacts of the different scenario policies and measures:  There is 19% less final energy demand in the WAM scenario relative to the WEM. The difference is explained by: o The increase in the carbon tax in the WAM scenario, which accounts for two-thirds of the difference between the scenarios  o All energy efficiency grant programmes in all sectors continue to the end of 2040 in the WAM scenario compared with to the end of 2022 in the WEM scenario  o Greater roll out of low carbon technologies such as electricity vehicles, heat pumps and smart meters in the WAM scenario o A higher proportion of renewable energy in the WAM scenario   Figure 28: Total final energy demand (WEM & WAM) ction Plan. A detailed policy package will be defined for the post-2030 period at a future date. Due to   233 continued economic and population growth post-2030 modelled, without any reductions for the impact of future Government intervention post-2030, final energy trends are observed to increase here. This is not an anticipated outcome, but only illustrative of a scenario without ongoing policy effort post 2030.  Total Final Energy Consumption by Sector The impacts of planned policies and measures can be observed at a sectoral level by comparing the scenarios in Figures 29 and 30. Some notable observations when comparing the impacts in each sector: Transport  The greatest source of disparity in absolute terms is in the transport sector, where the carbon tax increase is responsible for over two-thirds of the 24% less final energy demand in the WAM scenario  Transport energy demand (including aviation) is projected to fall year-on-year from 2021 to 2030 and post-2030 in the WAM scenario, even though growth in transport activity demand is anticipated Industry  The increasing carbon tax is responsible for a 10% fall in final energy demand in the industry sector, the impact of the Support Scheme for Renewable Heat (SSRH) and energy-efficiency measures sees a further fall to a difference of 11% less demand in the WAM scenario by 2030  Industry energy demand is projected to grow steadily throughout the period 2020-2030 and post-2030 in the WAM scenario Residential  In the residential sector, the increasing carbon tax in the WAM accounts for almost half of the difference between the scenarios in 2020 (9 percentage points). A further 11 percentage points is due to a much higher level of ambition for energy-efficiency retrofits (a greater number of homes meeting higher energy-efficiency performance levels) and greater deployment of heat pumps  Residential energy demand is projected to fall year-on-year throughout the period 2020-2030 in the WAM scenario but post-2030 there is a return to growth in the absence of policy details and with continuing projected population growth     234 Services  The increasing carbon tax is responsible for a 9% fall in final energy demand in the services sector. The impact of the Support Scheme for Renewable Heat (SSRH) and energy-efficiency measures sees a further fall to a difference of 20% less demand in the WAM scenario by 2030  In the services sector, while final energy consumption grows in the early part of the decade to 2025, it declines by 3% between 2025 and 2030. This is achieved through additional ambition in national energy efficiency programmes, including a goal set out commercial and public building stock   Progress in the services sector is against the backdrop of increasing electricity demand in that sector driven by deployment of data centres. By 2030, data centres could account for approximately a quarter (25%) of all final electricity demand in the services sector.   Figure 29: Total final energy consumption by sector (WEM)   235  Figure 30: Total final energy consumption by sector (WAM) Total Final Energy Consumption by Fuel The impacts of planned policies and measures on final energy consumption by fuel can be observed by comparing the scenarios in Figures 31 and 32. Some notable observations when comparing the impacts in each sector: Oil  Oil demand as a share of total final energy has already peaked in both scenarios. The peak in absolute terms is 2023 in the WEM scenario and 2020 in the WAM scenario. By 2030 oil accounts for just under half of all energy demand in the WEM scenario (49%), but this nine percentage points lower (~41% share) in the WAM scenario  The planned increasing carbon tax, the effective ban in oil boilers in new dwellings from 2022 and increased energy efficiency improvement ambition in the WAM scenario see the absolute oil demand between scenarios fall from 3% less (in absolute terms) in the WAM scenario in 2020 to 33% less by 2030.   The majority of oil demand is used in the transport sector and there is less oil demand in transport in the WAM scenario due to greater biofuels blending and electric vehicles targets. The fossil fuel dependency in transport falls from 94% in 2020 to 91 % in 2030 in the WAM scenario.    236 Electricity  Electricity is the second most dominant final energy demand source. Electricity demand is projected to grow from a fifth of final energy demand (20%) to 23% in the WEM scenario by 2030 and 29% in the WAM scenario. In absolute terms, there is growth of ~2% -4% per annum expected in both scenario to 2030  The industry sector is responsible for ~45% of all electricity use in Ireland currently, and this share is projected to grow to over 60% in both scenarios by 2030. In absolute terms, the electricity demand in industry is projected to grow by around 2% per annum to 2030. Currently the most dominant energy source for industry, the electricity share in total industry energy demand is due to grow from just under a third to just under 40% in the WAM scenario by 2040   The residential sector is responsible for just over a third of all electricity demand currently. Electricity demand is expected to grow in the WEM scenario at a rate of just over 2% per annum, but slightly less than 2% per annum in the WAM scenario due to additional efficiency measures in that scenario. This is the case even though more heat pumps are deployed in the WAM scenario. Electricity is projected to become the most dominant energy source in the residential sector from 2025 onwards in the WAM scenario  Electricity dominates the services sector energy demand, with a current share of 43%, a trend that is projected to continue. In the WAM scenario, the growth in electricity demand is less than the WEM scenario resulting in 9% less electricity required in the WAM services sector by 2030   The transport share in total electricity demand is set to grow from less than 1% to 5% by 2030 in the WEM scenario and 10% in the WAM scenario with the increased roll out of electric vehicles. The electricity share in transport energy demand increases from almost zero to 3% in the WEM scenario by 2030 and 8% in the WAM scenario Gas  Gas demand grows in absolute terms to 2040 in the WEM scenario, whereas in the WAM it peaks in 2020 and falls by approximately 7% per annum until 2030. In the absence of policy detail, post-2030 gas demand could potentially grow again post-2030 in the WAM scenario driven by economic growth, especially in the industry sector  The share of gas final energy demand currently 15% only increases by one and two percentage points in the WAM and WEM scenarios respectively by 2030. The   237 increasing carbon tax, the effective ban in gas boilers in new dwellings from 2025 and increased energy efficiency improvement ambition in the WAM scenario sees the absolute gas demand between scenarios fall from 5% less demand than the WEM scenario in 2025 to 20% less in 2030  The majority of gas demand is used in industry, and this share grows from around 40% currently to accounting for half of all energy in both scenarios by 2030. The residential sector currently accounts for just under a third of total final gas demand but that share falls to just over a quarter by 2030. Whereas the services sector gas demand remains close to a quarter of total final gas demand over the period 2020 to 2030 in both scenarios Solid Fossil Fuels  Currently approximately 60% of coal use is in the residential sector and 40% in industry. This is expected to change to a 50:50 split by 2030 in the WEM scenario and flip to 65% of coal use to be in industry and 35% in the residential sector in the WAM scenario. In absolute terms coal demand falls by 23% in 2030 in the WEM scenario and by 46% in the WAM scenario, accounting for less than 2% of final energy demand by 2030 in both scenarios  Peat is only used in the residential sector where it has a current share of approximate 7% of total residential energy use. By 2030, the share of peat in the residential sector falls to approximately 3% of total demand in that sector Renewables  The share of renewables in total final energy demand increases from the current level of just under 5% to 7% by 2030 in the WEM scenario and 12% in the WAM scenario. In the residential sector the roll out of heat pumps and energy efficiency measures increase the 2030 renewables share for 9% in the WEM scenario to 20% in the WAM. The difference is less pronounced in the services sector, where the share increases from the current level of 5% to 10% by 2030 in the WEM and 16% in the WAM due to additional heat pumps and energy efficiency. The renewables share in industry grows from the current level of 8% predominately from biomass to 10% by 2030 in the WEM scenario and 12% in the WAM scenario. In absolute terms, industry renewable energy grows by 56% over the period 2020 to 2030 and is 13% higher than the WEM scenario by 2030  The share of renewable energy from bioliquids and biogas is currently 4% of all transport energy demand excluding aviation. The share increases to 5% in the WEM   238 scenario and 9% in WAM scenario by 2030. The introduction of electric vehicles and transport modal shift and energy efficiency measures means that in absolute terms the quantity of bioenergy does not grow in the WEM scenario. There is strong growth of 27% from 2020 to 2025 in the WAM scenario, before declining in line with the falling share of internal combustion engine vehicles in the stock post 2025   Figure 31: Total final energy consumption by fuel (WEM)   239  Figure 32: Total final energy consumption by sector (WAM) Overall Renewable Share   Figure 33: Overall RES shares in gross final consumption   240 Figure 33 consumption across electricity, heat and transport, historically and for 2020 and 2030. The impact of planned policies and measures can be observed by comparing the WEM scenario with the WAM scenario.  Impact of Planned Policies   By 2020 the planned policies deliver an overall RES share of approximately 13%, WAM scenarios is due in part to a lower RES-E contribution which had less co-firing in 2020 than the WEM scenario o Renewable electricity - RES-E will provide the biggest contribution towards the overall renewable energy target in 2020.  o In 2020 the biggest impact in the transport sector will be from biofuels  o The Support Scheme for Renewable Heat (SSRH) will only make a 1-year contribution to the overall target  In 2030, the impact of planned policies across the sectors on overall RES share is significant. It is anticipated that planned polies will deliver a RES share of 34.1 % by 2030 in the WAM scenario  o The biggest contributions is from RES-E (20.2% towards overall RES) along with Corporate Power Purchase Agreements are assumed to deliver almost 70% RES-E by 2030 (2/3 RESS and 1/3 CPPAs) o RES-H contributes 9.3% towards overall RES, with the full implementation of the Support Scheme for Renewable Heat (SSRH), and heat pump uptake through building regulations driving growth of renewables o Transport makes up the balance of the 2030 overall RES share, contributing 4.36 percentage points primarily through the biofuels obligation scheme  Further detail on the impacts of planned policies on renewable target achievement for each sector are provided in the sections that follow. Renewable Transport  RES-T The impacts of planned policies and measures in the transport sector can be observed by comparing the scenarios and in Figure 34.  By 2020 in WAM the statutory biofuel obligation is increased to require 11 litres of biofuel in every 100 litres of fuel (with the contribution of multiple counting included in   241 this figure). The corresponding average blend levels by volume are 5% in petrol and -T target (i.e. the target including multiple counting factors, rather than the contribution to the overall renewables share) to 11.3% in the WAM scenario. This compares with 10.9% RES-T in 2020  By 2030 the planned policies and measures included in WAM have an even more significant impact, delivering an additional 15.8 percentage points to the regulation RES-T target compared with the WEM scenario. Through increased ambition in s Biofuel Obligation Scheme, average biofuel blends of E10 and B12 reached by 2030 (compared with E5.0 and B7 in the WEM scenario). All of the biodiesel supplied in the WAM scenario is assumed to come from feedstocks listed in Annex IX parts A and B and their contribution will therefore count twice towards the standalone RES-T target. The WAM scenario also includes just over 936,000 electric vehicles on the road in 2030 compared with just under 489,000 in the WEM scenario, with the greater ambition supporte  Figure 34: Renewable transport (RES-T)     242 Renewable Electricity  RES-E   Figure 35: Renewable Electricity (RES-E) Figure 35 shows the evolution of the RES-E share, over the two modelled scenarios, historically and projected for 2020 and 2030. This figure is discussed comparing the impact of planned policies between the WEM and the WAM.   It is anticipated in 2020 that a RES-E of 37.6% is achieved in the WAM scenario compared to 36.3% in the WEM scenario. This 1.3 percentage point difference is driven in part by less co-firing in 2020 in the WAM scenario, which assumes two of the peat plants will not be co-firing in 2020 because of unsuccessful planning application for co-firing. However, it should be noted that less biomass used for electricity generation in the WAM scenario leads to a slight increase of renewable heat in that year and approximately the same for overall renewable energy share o in 2020, wind (primarily onshore) is the predominant contributor to renewable electricity (making up approximately a third of all electricity generation) o The installed capacities for renewables for wind and solar in 2020 are informed by the Regulator (CRU) ECP1 decision (Enduring Connection Policy)   243 o biomass renewables making up 2.1 percentage points of 2020 RES-E with policies. This is due to 40 % co-firing up to REFIT threshold for biomass support in one peat plant (Edenderry) and also generation from biomass CHP   In 2030 there is a more prominent impact of RES-E policies, with achievement of 70 % RES-E in the WAM scenario. This compares with the assumed deployment of renewables to reach 55% RES-NECP  o The growth in renewables in WAM is driven by a new Renewable Energy Support Scheme (RESS) approved by the Government in July 2018. Under -E by 2030 through an auction-based mechanism o To achieve this 70% RES-E in 2030 it requires an increase by 324% in renewables capacity between 2018 and 2030 (or average of 740 MW additional capacity per year). This compares with a historical onshore wind deployment rate of 200 MW. This acceleration in the wind deployment rate is also driven by an additional 37% increase in electricity demand projected between 2018 and 2030  o In 2030 there is a broader mix of renewables, with growing shares for both solar and offshore wind  o Deployment of offshore wind capaciy is assumed to grow from 2025 onwards in line with assumptions from .  o Hydro capacity remains unchanged over the time horizon and sees a reducing share as other renewables in the mix grow  o Deployment of 30 MW of ocean energy is modelled in WAM by 2030 to take account of planned deployment of demonstration projects Renewable Heat  RES-H The impacts of planned policies and measures on renewable heat can be observed by comparing the scenarios in Figures 36 and 37:  Planned policies deliver an additional 0.2 percentage points of renewable heat by 2020 in the WAM scenario   Planned policies contribute an additional 10 percentage points to RES-H by 2030 in the WAM scenario relative to the WEM. The increase is driven by the full delivery of the SSRH in the non-ETS industry and services sectors, growth in use of biogas, and   244 the impact of the heat pump grant for homes switching from oil boilers with assumed 377,000 heat pumps deployed in existing homes by 2030 and 178,000 deployed in new homes. The uptake of low carbon heating technologies in new buildings is driven by building regulations and an effective ban on oil boilers (2022) and gas boilers (2025) in new dwellings in the WAM scenario   Uptake of low carbon heating solutions in industry and service sectors is modelled factoring in fuel and technology prices, attitudes of investors and building stock characteristics. In that, the WAM scenario uptake of biomass boilers and heat pumps continues to grow in these sectors in the latter half of the 2020s (after SSRH supports come to an end)   The BioHEAT model also keeps track of the allocation of biomass resource across all energy end-use sectors. It accounts for the impact of biomass use in electricity on the availability of biomass resource for heating and the consequent impact on the price of biomass fuels. The WEM scenario has a higher level of biomass co-firing in g in higher biomass prices in the heating sector and thus uptake of biomass heating technologies is partly curtailed. This explains why the contribution of biomass to RES-H is slightly higher in the WAM scenario compared with the WEM in 2020 with the disparity increase by just over two percentage points by 2030 (as the WAM includes the most recent assumptions based on the closure of two of the peat plants at the end of 2020)   245  Figure 36: Renewable heat by sector (RES-H)  Figure 37: Renewable heat by technology     246 Projections in Total Greenhouse Gas The greenhouse gas emissions projections prepared for the National Energy and Climate Plan take into account projected activity data provided by a number of key data providers including:   Updated energy projections provided by the Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland (SEAI) in January 2020.  Agricultural projections provided by Teagasc in November which consider the impact of Food Wise 2025 for the agriculture sector.   The emissions projections that have been prepared for the National Energy and Climate Plan are projecting from the 2018 inventory baseline year (February 2020 version).  The Projections with planned policies and measures scenario assumes implementation of the existing policies and measures and additional policies and measures that are included in  In terms of sectors covered by the Effort Sharing Decision under this scenario Ireland is projected to cumulatively exceed its compliance obligations by approximately 12.6 Mt CO2 equivalent over the period 2013-2020.  In terms of the same sectors covered under the Effort Sharing Regulation the projections indicate that Ireland will have a surplus of approximately 27.8 Mt CO2eq over the 2021-2030 period assuming both ETS and LULUCF flexibilities as set out in the Effort Sharing Regulation are fully utilised. If only the LULUCF flexibility were to be utilised that surplus would be reduced to 8.9 Mt CO2eq. Under the WAM scenario total emissions (excluding LULULCF) are projected to decrease by 33% and 28.5% by 2030 and 2040 respectively compared to 2005 levels (from the 1990-2018 inventory).   247  Figure 38: All greenhouse gas emissions with targets ETS emissions are projected to decrease by 42% and 17.7% by 2030 and 2040 respectively under the WAM scenario compared to 2005 levels.  Figure 39: ETS emissions (WEM and WAM) Total emissions from sectors under the Effort Sharing Regulation are projected to decrease by 28.6% and 33.6% by 2030 and 2040 respectively compared to 2005 levels under the WAM scenario.  Emissions from Energy Industries (corresponding to IPCC Sector 1.A.1.) are projected to decrease by 56.3% and 34.6% by 2030 and 2040 respectively compared to 2005 levels.   248  Emissions from Industry (corresponding to IPCC Sector 1.A.2.) are projected to decrease by 13.9% by 2030 and increase by 8.4% by 2040 compared to 2005 levels.  Emissions from Residential (corresponding to IPCC Sector 1.A.4.b.) are projected to decrease by 59.6% and 62.2% by 2030 and 2040 respectively compared to 2005 levels.  Emissions from Tertiary (corresponding to IPCC Sector 1.A.4.a.) are projected to decrease by 44.6% and 39.1% by 2030 and 2040 respectively compared to 2005 levels.  Emissions from Transport (corresponding to IPCC Sector 1.A.3.) are projected to decrease by 42.1% and 66.4% by 2030 and 2040 respectively compared to 2005 levels.  Emissions from Agriculture (corresponding to IPCC Sector 3.) are projected to decrease by 7.5% and 6.2% by 2030 and 2040 respectively compared to 2005 levels.  Emissions from LULUCF are projected to increase by 4.2% and 18.8% by 2030 and 2040 respectively compared to 2005 levels.   Figure 40: Effort sharing sector total greenhouse gas emissions   249  Figure 41: Effort sharing sector cumulative greenhouse gas emissions  Projections in Air Pollutant Emissions  Positive changes have been made since 1990, benefiting air quality and human health. Fuel switching from coal and peat to natural gas and kerosene in the residential sector has reduced particulate matter pollution, particularly important in urban areas. A higher penetration of renewables in electricity generation and changes in the age structure of the national vehicle fleet to newer, lower emission class vehicles, have also resulted in a general downward trend in emissions of many pollutants.  Challenges remain for Ireland however in relation to continued compliance with its obligations under the NEC Directive. Whilst currently in compliance with its international ceilings for most gases, the latest trends and projections indicate that Ireland will have to implement significant mitigation measures to remain in compliance out to 2030.Implementing the measures announced in the Climate Action Plan will be important but not sufficient to meet all future ceilings.  Looking towards the future, non-compliance with emission ceilings for NOx and NMVOCs is projected in 2020 and NOx compliance in 2030 will require full implementation of the measures in the Climate Action Plan, including significant electrification of the transport sector. Compliance with the 2030 NMVOC ceiling will require new measures.  Ireland exceeded its emission ceiling for NH3 in 2018, having already done so in 2016 and 2017. The exceedance was driven primarily by increased animal numbers and fertiliser nitrogen. Continued non-compliance with the ammonia ceiling over the entire compliance period to 2030 is currently projected. Widespread adoption of on farm measures aimed at reducing emissions, such as the use of protected urea fertilisers and low emissions slurry spreading, are now required to reverse this trend.    250  Figure 42: Trends in SO2 emissions, current and future emission ceilings   Figure 43: Trends in NOx emissions, current and future emission ceilings  Figure 44: NOx emissions after use of flexibility mechanism   251  Figure 45: Trends in NMVOC emissions, current and future emission ceilings  Figure 46: NMVOC emissions after use of flexibility mechanism   Figure 47: Trends in NH3 emissions, current and future emission ceilings   252  Figure 48: Trends in PM2.5 emissions, current and future emission ceilings   ii. Assessment of policy interactions (between existing policies and measures and planned policies and measures within a policy dimension and between existing policies and measures and planned policies and measures of different dimensions) at least until the last year of the period covered by the plan, in particular to establish a robust understanding of the impact of energy efficiency / energy savings policies on the sizing of the energy system and to reduce the risk of stranded investment in energy supply The Irish Government 2019 Climate Action Plan (CAP) is the main difference between the With Existing Measures scenario (WEM) and the With Additional Measures (WAM) scenario. Published in June 2019, the CAP commits to achieving a net zero carbon energy system by 2050 and a 2030 pathway that is consistent with the 2050 target. Many of the planned policies and measures affecting the evolution of the energy system are those same policies included in the With Existing Measures scenario (WEM) but with additional levels of ambition assumed in the With Additional Measures (WAM). For example, a Renewable Electricity Support Scheme (RESS) is included in all scenarios but with different levels of ambition for renewable electricity in 2030. Furthermore, a key measure in the CAP is an increasing carbon tax to 2030. The planned increasing carbon tax is an example of a crosscutting measure that will interact with all other policies and measures. Therefore, it is not possible to assess the policy interactions for all policies and measures. The CAP includes the following policy measures relevant in this context:  A target of a 30% greenhouse gas emissions reduction by 2030 achieved through o A trajectory for the price of carbon increasing annually to 2030 to create incentives that help avoid locking in carbon intensive technologies.   253  The carbon tax effectively increases consumer energy costs, thus curtailing energy demand growth and reducing future expansion of the energy system. The carbon tax curtails energy demand increases in all non-Emissions Trading sectors. o Energy efficiency ambition   50% energy efficiency improvement in the public sector relative to a 2005 baseline.  Increased ambition for national energy efficiency programmes in the residential and services sectors under the WAM scenario deliver additional savings in final energy demand.   These additional savings help to reduce the burden on supply-side policies (such as RESS and the Biofuels Obligation Scheme (BOS) in meeting their objectives.  Increasing the stringency of building regulations, effectively banning oil boilers from 2022 and gas boilers in new dwellings from 2025, and roll out of heat pump technologies in the residential and services sectors.  The overlap between the building regulations, the ban of fossil-fuel boilers and the heat pump rollout is tempered by the intention that over two-thirds of the roll-out of heat pumps designed to be for existing dwellings.  Fossil fuel boilers are effectively banned through a move to meet Nearly Zero Energy Building (NZEB) regulations.   Heat pumps are more efficient than methods relying on fuel combustion and direct electric heating, so an increasing heat pump share in supplying heat demand slows or eliminates growth in heat demand.  There is also an overlap with energy-efficiency improvements, which lower the overall heat demand. o Biofuels blending of 12% biodiesel and 10% biogasoline, as well as a 30%-33% share of electric vehicles across the entire vehicle fleet.  Electric drive trains are more efficient than their fossil-fuelled counterparts, therefore, a greater number of electric vehicles contributes towards lowering the total transport energy demand.    254  An increasing share of electric vehicles in the fleet also reduces the quantity of biofuels required to meet the target Biofuels Obligation scheme blending rates. o 70% renewable electricity share  There are inherent efficiency improvements through the process of electrifying heat and transport, that should slow the increase in electricity demand and help to delay or avoid further fossil-fuelled power-plant growth, as well as lowering the renewables installed capacity required to meet a particular share of renewable electricity.  The impact of the additional energy efficiency supports can be noted by comparing the assessment of primary energy savings in the WAM scenario with the WEM scenario in Tables 52 and 53. Most of the additional savings are from reduced oil consumption, particularly in home and the services sector heating demand. In the With Existing Measure (WEM) scenario, while some of the energy efficiency programmes are assumed to deliver sustained savings out to 2022 others see increased ambition in line with the Irish (NDP). In comparison in the WAM scenario there is increased ambition (beyond the NDP) in deliver 15.8 TWh of additional savings above WEM in 2030.  Table 52: Energy efficiency contribution (WEM) Energy Efficiency Contribution 2018 2020 2030 2040 Primary Energy Savings (GWh) 19,420 23,458  46,362  65,346  Total Primary Energy Consumption (GWh) 170,922  186,100  192,905  227,436  Savings as Share of Total Consumption (%) 11.4%  12.6% 24.0%  28.7%   Table 53: Energy efficiency contribution (WAM) Energy Efficiency Contribution 2018 2020 2030 2040 Primary Energy Savings (GWh) 19,326  25,103  62,171  85,581  Total Primary Energy Consumption (GWh) 170,922 181,716  159,146 187,254  Savings as Share of Total Consumption (%) 11.3%  13.8%  39.1%  45.7%    255 iii. Assessment of interactions between existing policies and measures and planned policies and measures, and between those policies and measures and Union climate and energy policy measures The existing and planned policies and measures set out under Chapters 2 and 3 under the five dimensions will significantly contribute towards the achievement of the EU energy and climate goals. These policies and measures ensure that Ireland is on course to achieving our long term goals towards 2050.  There is potential for overlaps between the Energy Union climate and energy policies and national policy measures. In the Irish approach, the impacts of the Energy Unions measures are usually applied first. Then the impact of additional national measures are calculated sequentially in the model, thereby mitigating overlaps as much as possible. In particular, the building regulations and efficiency of passenger car regulations are likely to overlap with additional national policies, such as, the effective ban on fossil fuel boilers in new buildings and the roll out of electric vehicles (lowering the average vehicle stock emissions performance). Some national policies will aim to move the markets ahead of EU policies such as happened with the national ban on incandescent light bulbs ahead of a similar European wide ban.  5.2. Macroeconomic and, to the extent feasible, the health, environmental, employment and education, skills and social impacts including just transition aspects (in terms of costs and benefits as well as cost-effectiveness) of the planned policies and measures described in section 3 at least until the last year of the period covered by the plan, including comparison to projections with existing policies and measures  The Macroeconomic forecasts published by the Department of Finance, contained in the annual Budget and Stability Programme Updates, take into account policies introduced at an aggregate level over the forecast horizon (typically 3 to 5 years).  In so far as policies impact on economic growth and employment, it is the overall or aggregate impact of the policies that will impact on the economic forecast rather than an factors is contributing to an increasingly fragile global economy at present. Rising trade tensions, fading fiscal stimulus in the US, a slowing Chinese economy, emissions-related difficulties in the German auto sector and uncertainty related to the timing and form of the  factors are inter-related and, at least at this stage, appear unlikely to subside in the near-term.   256 In addition to the contribution of the policies and measures contained in this Plan to achieve our climate and energy targets, many of the changes that are required will have positive economic and societal co-benefits, including cleaner air, warmer homes, and a more sustainable economy for the long term. In line with the UN Sustainable Development Goals, climate action must be seen as complementary to other important policy objectives, such as promoting sustainable economic development pathways, improving energy security, and addressing air pollution impacts on human health. For example, a significant shift away from internal combustion engine vehicles in the transport sector, and the retrofitting of existing buildings with electricity-powered heat pump systems, are expected to result in significant improvements in local air quality metrics and health outcomes. interests, but also in relation to the attractiveness of Ireland as a location for Foreign Direct Investment, as a tourism destination, and as a source of safe, high-quality agricultural and food products. In addition, our increased climate ambition will help to secure our international reputation, which in turn will underpin our ability to promote international policy objectives. partnerships, in recognition of the adverse and dangerous impacts that it poses to the realisation of the Sustainable Development Goals. IEA analysis suggests energy efficiency retrofits in buildings create conditions that support improved occupant health and well-being. In terms of distribution, such benefits are particularly prevalent among vulnerable groups such as children, the elderly and those with pre-existing illnesses. Benefits include improved physical health such as reduced symptoms of respiratory and cardiovascular conditions, rheumatism, arthritis and allergies, as well as fewer injuries. In quantifying these benefits, studies have found benefit to cost ratios of up to 4:1 when health and well-being impacts were included, with health benefits representing up to 75% of overall benefits. Improved mental health (reduced chronic stress and depression) has, in some cases, been seen to represent as much as half of total health benefits. Realised health improvements generate downstream social and economic impacts, including lower public health spending. These health and well-being benefits are being validated in an Irish context under the Warmth and Wellbeing scheme.  Decarbonisation of heat and transport may also lead to health gains where levels of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) air pollution are reduced. Biomass combustion for renewable heat can increase levels of air pollution so careful consideration of this potential negative health impact is required when assessing renewable heat policy. The WHO guidelines recognise   257 low which there is no damage to health. Therefore,  Therefore, reduced adverse health impacts from reduced air pollution in Ireland can be a significant co-benefit of the decarbonisation of power generation, heat and transport where climate and clean air policy objectives are fully aligned. Recent research shows that air pollution has greater impacts on human health at lower levels than was previously understood. The impacts of air pollution (in particular nitrogen pollution) on biodiversity and habitats are an area of growing concern. This increased understanding of the importance of air pollution has led to a requirement for strengthening policy responses on air quality for which the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment has primary responsibility. The impact of sectoral policies on the quality of the air we breathe, such as energy, transport and agriculture, is becoming clearer. Initiatives to tackle greenhouse gas emissions over the last decade have led to the incentivisation of biomass for heating and diesel for motoring while in the agricultural sector increased livestock numbers has highlighted the impacts of, and challenges in, reducing ammonia emissions as well as greenhouse gases such as methane. These unintended consequences illustrate the need for a means to integrate air quality concerns into broader policy making. They also demonstrate the need to align air quality, climate and energy policy to ensure positive outcomes for human health and the environment.  It is evident that the transition will bring many opportunities, for example:  Renewables, as the installed renewable power capacity goes from 3.5 GW to 17.5 GW huge opportunities will emerge  Offshore technologies are only applied at a very small level in Ireland now, but the scale of the opportunity has been estimated at 70 GW  The 25,000 homes currently participating in energy retrofits represent an estimated   Many new technologies  micro-generation, anaerobic digestion, biomass, heat recovery, carbon capture, biomethane  will come to maturity bringing new business opportunities As set out in Future Jobs Ireland 2019, these opportunities will require clear planning by sectors and agencies. The education and training agencies will be required to develop the professional expertise, the apprenticeship and traineeship and the certification capacity to turn these needs into new start-ups and good livelihoods. Developing the opportunities in a decarbonising economy is a key pillar of our Climate Action Plan. The opportunities   258 emerging in the areas of retrofitting, new farming methods, soil remediation and the bioeconomy, for example, will be systematically developed through research and innovation, enterprise hubs and skill development both at a national and regional level.  Citizen involvement is a key pillar of our Climate Action Plan. To underpin this plan sets out specific strategies including:  Engagement Capacity Building and empowering Local Community Action  Realising the new economic opportunities in communities and regions  Just Transition for those facing particular challenges in adjusting through reskilling, energy poverty schemes and community participation  Empowering the new generation to have their voices heard and get access to the science and the opportunity to lead change Investment in the low carbon economy has the potential to create quality jobs and support local communities and workers in regions most strongly impacted by the on-going transformation to a decarbonised society. Fully realising the economic opportunities in the Group will help to improve the resilience of communities and households by providing information and building capacity, taking account of the distinctive needs of urban and rural communities. Improved training and support initiatives will also be provided. The Just Transition Fund will be devoted to those priorities identified by local communities. It is anticipated that energy efficiency investment undertaken will support over 400 environmentally sustainable jobs, with up to 100 more jobs through expanded peatlands rehabilitation. Further detail on the policies and measures regarding the Just Transition are set out at section 3.1.3(iv).  Investment and jobs in ound that delivering on the climate action plan indicated target of 3.5 GW of offshore wind energy by 2030 would equate to a lifetime investment . Today Irish firms could only capture 22% of this investment but, with the right support, this could quickly grow to 31-36% and eventually as much as half. The report also indicated that meeting this target by 2030 could generate 2500 local development and construction jobs and 700 permanent operations and maintenance jobs. The report recommends that offshore wind enterprise zones are needed urgently to ensure Ireland takes advantage of this opportunity. Energy efficiency improvements can deliver benefits across the whole economy, with direct and indirect impacts on economic activity, employment, trade balance and energy prices. In   259 general, analysis of GDP changes due to large-scale energy efficiency policies show positive outcomes with economic growth ranging from 0.25% to 1.1% per year. The potential for job creation ranges from 8 to 27 job years per EUR 1 million invested in energy efficiency measures.  5.3. Overview of Investment Needs i. Existing investment flows and forward investment assumptions with regard to the planned policies and measures National Mitigation Plan, Project Ireland 2040, published in 2018, ensures that past patterns of carbon intensive development and growth will not be repeated. The National Development Plan (NDP) 2018-2027 sets out invest for climate action for the 10 y would come from the Exchequer. -state companies and by the private sector funding has been made available for sustainable mobility projects, mostly in public transport. The starting point for the implementation of the NDP was the identification of infrastructure and investment priorities detailed in chapter 5. The evidence in chapter 2, in combination with the prioritisation by departments of projects outlined in chapter 5, provides a comprehensive national picture of critical infrastructural needs. A full mid-term review of the NDP will be undertaken in 2022, to allow Government to take stock of progress in terms of delivery of the planned projects and programmes, and to allow Government to review and reaffirm its investment priorities. The four Project Ireland 2040 funds, comprising the Climate Action Fund, Disruptive Technologies Innovation Fund, the Urban Regeneration and Development Fund, and the Rural Regeneration and Development Fund, will have a collective budget amounting to an  over the ten-year period. Each of the four funds has been established to pursue distinct objectives, which must also be aligned with the strategic investment priorities and the National Strategic Outcomes of Project Ireland 2040. We will ensure that, within their mandates, the selection criteria for each of the funds will operate to promote low-carbon investments. Climate Action Fund is to leverage investment by public and private y and climate targets. The Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment has responsibility for implementing the fund. The Fund is one of four established under the NDP. It will support initiatives that contribute to the achievement of Ireland's climate and energy targets in a cost-effective manner. It also seeks to facilitate projects that contribute to other Government policy priorities including:   260  Supporting innovation and capacity building towards the development of climate change solutions capable of being scaled and delivering benefits beyond a once-off impact  Generating wider socio-economic benefits such as job creation, air quality improvements, reduction in fuel poverty, bio-diversity and community resilience and development The successful projects for the first round of the Fund were announced in November 2018.  and established a Climate Action Fund, designed to stimulate innovation and pioneer efforts across Irish society. This provided a solid foundation for Ireland to develop and publish its all of Government Climate Action Plan in 2019, which will deliver a step-change in our emissions performance over the coming decade. The cumulative costs of the commitments included in the Climate Action Plan will be delivered within the normal budgetary and estimates process, and the NDP ceilings. The modelling underpinning the NECP is based on planned climate and energy measures and investment under Project Ireland 2040 being fully delivered together with delivery of the policies and measures set out under the Climate Action Plan, the 70% RESS renewable electricity objective being achieved (funded via the PSO levy) with the necessary grid enhancements and investment being undertaken in the framework of programme to permit the grid to accommodate that level of variable generation. The biofuels obligation scheme will continue to be used to ensure increased amounts of biofuels and that funding for the support scheme for renewable heat will be extended beyond the current funding period.  Further detail regarding specific sectoral investment needs, flows and assumptions is set at section A under the five dimensions, some of which is highlighted below.  The Public Service Obligation levy (PSO) is chargeable to electricity consumers and is used to support new electricity projects generated from renewable sources. The amount of the levy varies from year to year depending on the amount of supported generation connected, the wholesale electricity market price and the agreed rate at which the generation is to be supported in accordance with the schemes in place. The NECP includes two planned electricity interconnectors. The Greenlink interconnector to   261 interconnector from the Irish and UK regulators. Under such a regulatory arrangement, if and British consumers would fund the difference.  The Celtic interconnector, propIreland and France. For both interconnectors the consumer portion of the cost would be  the costs will be included in the costs of distribution networks in the same way as all other electricity infrastructure investments are paid for.   and Development Plan provide insights into investments required in the coming decade.  Figures are published relating to agricultural investment in the Annual Review and Outlook. These amounts are total investment in Agriculture, broken down into Farm Buildings, Land Improvements, Transport Equipment, Agricultural Machinery and Equipment, Other equipment and Breeding Stock.  Investments in critical economic infrastructure, including our transport network, have  and high levels of employment. This positive growth brings challenges to the sector, particularly in relation to climate change and capacity constraints. Addressing these challenges necessitates improved public transport links and increasingly sustainable mobility. Major sustainable transport projects proposed in IrelBusConnects and the DART Expansion Programme. Investment in these projects will enable more Irish residents and visitors to choose sustainable travel options and greatly enhance our ability to reduce carbon emissions in the sector. 2020, in four key areas: smarter travel and sustainable urban transport; heavy rail safety and development; public transport infrastructure; and walking and cycling. This is an increase of 32% compared to funding provided in 2019. This allocation facilitates continued progress to be made in addressing congestion issues and emerging capacity constraints across the public transport systems in our cities and towns. An inin carbon reduction measures for transport was provided for in Budget 2020. These measures are focused primarily on promoting emissions savings in the land transport sector through supporting modal shift from private cars towards public transport, as well as making public transport more climate friendly; a transition of the private car fleet to alternative fuels; and a reduction in emissions from the heavy duty vehicle and freight sector.   262 Carbon Tax The signature Climate Change Measure in Budget 2020 was a 30% increase in Carbon Tax widely recognised as a cost effective means of achieving carbon abatement.  Extensive modelling undertaken by the Economic and Social Research Institute has analysed the distributional impact of increases in carbon tax. It demonstrates that using carbon tax revenue to reduce other distortionary taxes can result in a double dividend, where emissions are reduced and economic growth is boosted. Government have committed to hypothecating carbon tax revenue to fund new climate action measures.  Mobilising Private Sector Investment There is a growing realisation that financial institutions, when they are funding the acquisition of assets, must pay far greater attention to the climate resilience of assets where they risk locking into high-carbon technologies, or other climate vulnerabilities, and in turn, show a greater willingness to fund investment in changes which can make those assets more climate resilient. There is a rapidly growing appetite in the financial sector to diversify into green activities. The transition to a low carbon economy and society also brings significant opportunities for the financial sector. Ensuring success will require technological innovation and investment. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimate that the world will need to spend around US$900bn annually until 2050 on energy-related mitigation investments if global warming is to be limited to 1.5 degrees. This investment will cover a range of activities:  Developing disruptive innovations, including some that we may not already have thought about  Expanding new types of infrastructures, including for clean sources of energy, not least given the potential increased cost efficiency of these  Adapting existing infrastructures, such as retrofitting existing homes and offices to make them more energy efficient This investment will need to be financed. To meet this challenge, the financial sector will need to innovate  just like the rest of the economy. We need to see rapid development of smart finance packages that recognise the constraints facing individuals and enterprises in making the change, with the Central Bank contributing, via its EU participation, to the   263 creation of a facilitative environment where climate related financial risks can be more efficiently assessed and considered. The low-carbon transition will require significant private investment alongside Exchequer expenditure on a sustained basis over a number of decades. Through the commercial State sector and other public bodies, we will seek to leverage the significant volumes of private sector capital that is available for well-structured projects, including wind and solar electricity generation, interconnection and major transport infrastructure. NewERA will work with the commercial state companies, Ireland Strategic Investment Fund (ISIF), Strategic Banking Corporation of Ireland (SBCI) and other public bodies, to identify priority opportunities in key sectors to mobilise private investment towards assisting in meeting our climate objectives. At a national level, the Ireland Strategic Investment Fund (ISIF) is used to unlock significant co-investment at a ratio of 1:2.8 (against a target of 1:investment plan, with investments to deliver substantial carbon reduction as one of its priority themes, has  to support total projects of .  Existing European funds will be used to mobilise private sector investment. Ireland has won funding in each programme area of Horizon 2020. Ireland has a success rate for receiving project funding under Horizon of 15.3%, 1 percentage point above the average success of won directly by Private Company applications. This funding will support a total project cost of . Ireland will continue to support the private sector in availing of the range of European funding mechanisms available for project financing. Ireland continues to use Exchequer resources and European financing schemes to support innovative exchequer and EU guarantees (through the EIB Group and the InnovFin loan guarantee scheme), the sch of lending to Irish Enterprises at a maximum interest rate 4%. The provision and level of funding to promote energy research in Ireland has been improved. The National Energy Research Development and Demonstration (RD&D) call for 2019, administered by the Sustainable Energy Authoritto 50 research projects. The 2019 RD&D call was the first call to provide for multi-year projects, thereby increasing the scope and depth of possible projects. Overall, the RD&D programme has undergone considerable growth over the past two years, funding more than 100 projects to the value of 21m during 2018 and 2019. This represents a significant increase in activities relative to previous years.    264 International Financial Services (IFS) are among the most competitive and rapidly changing global industries. We need to be able to maintain and grow our existing IFS sector by exploiting opportunities and meeting any emerging challenges in this very dynamic and very competitive sector. We have published a new IFS strategy, which includes the development  European Semester Based on the 2019 Country Report for Ireland, published on 27 February 2019, the recommendation for a Council recommendation for Ireland issued on 5 June 2019. The Commission  The Report notes that the Climate Action Plan represents a much-needed breakthrough and a stepping stone in the transition to a climate neutral and circular economy. It states that there is scope for improving energy efficiency, renewables provision and material recycling and finds that the plan constitutes an important step to address these challenges, though its success will depend on the implementation of public measures that could trigger additional private investments. It is anticipated that the implementation of the policies and measures set out under this plan will trigger significant additional private investment bringing Ireland closer to achieving its climate and energy goals. Ireland welcomes the increased focus as part of the European Semester process on the challenges and opportunities for each country arising from the climate and energy transition ii. Sector or market risk factors Public funding is, as in all jurisdictions, dependent on the pace of economic growth and planned tax takes being available to fund planned policies and measures. The ability to harness increased amounts of electricity generated from renewable sources on a relatively brought forward and delivered on. Delays arising as a result of legislative appeals under the Spatial Planning System are also a risk to the delivery on time of planned infrastructure projects. It is assumed that EU regulation over the period will ensure that industry deliver products meeting higher environmental standards.  The planned exit of the UK from the EU presents Ireland with challenges. Ireland will be the  Decarbonising the transport sector will require a transition away from conventional fuel use to alternative fuels and new technologies. This transition must have the capacity to cater for   265 increasing travel demand, consequently, it is imperative that investment decisions avoid -y growth of the transport network. Major operational and infrastructural changes are costly and take time; therefore, an initial transition must not preclude any subsequent transitions between technologies as this will create undesirable and expensive delays in providing for transport expansion.  Alternatively fuelled vehicles are currently still more expensive than conventionally fuelled options. It is also important to note that alternatively fuelled right hand drive vehicles are less readily available; this is a particular risk factor in the bus sector where the number of models available is severely limited. Generally, as greater market availability of low and zero-emission vehicles becomes more pronounced their economic viability should improve in the longer term. Transitioning to alternatively fuelled vehicles potentially requires a significant change in infrastructural and fuel supply requirements. Impact assessments of the capacity and availability of renewable power and gas supplies will be required as more vehicles convert to alternatively fuelled models.  iii. Analysis of additional public finance support or resources to fill gaps identified under point ii A number of EU supports are available and under Horizon 2020, Ireland has a secured funding of  across the full range of sectors which include energy, transport and environment. Ireland success rate under Horizon 2020 of 15.21% is above the EU average of 14.16%. While research carried out by higher educational institutions accounts for 56.3% of the funding received, the Horizon 2020 programme has assisted in driving research and innovation within the private sector. Private companies accounting for 34.2 % of the funding awarded with almost two thirds of the companies involved classified as small to medium enterprises. In 2018, Science Foundation Ireland, which supports scientific research to deliver transformative economic and societal impact in Ire. This funding came from a variety of sources with the ratio of non-Exchequer to Exchequer funding being 2.5:1. In comparison, the National Development Plan projects seeks to achieve its objections with a funding ratio of calls of 1:3.65. The Connecting Europe Facility and Projects of Common Interest are also important funding sources in the energy area, as is the ability to borrow from the European Investment Bank.   266 5.4. Impacts of planned policies and measures described in section 3 on other Member States and regional co-operation at least until the last year of the period covered by the plan, including comparison to projections with existing policies and measures  i. Impacts on the energy system in neighbouring and other Member States in the region to the extent possible eland will be in a position where planned policies and measures have little or no impact on other Member States. The planned Celtic Interconnector is likely to drive down electricity prices for the consumer through increased competition and because Ireland will be able to join the European Internal Energy market, we can maintain higher levels of wind and renewable energy. Table 54: Projected electricity imports and exports (WEM) Electricity Interconnection Flows Between Ireland and: Unit 2018 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2040 UK Not including NI because of All-Island electricity system on Island of Ireland               Electricity Imports GWh 0 613 675 684 748 762 659 788 843 783 765 868 692 Electricity Exports GWh 0 2,134 2,099 2,134 2,115 2,099 2,209 2,176 2,199 2,148 2,253 2,184 2,773 France               Electricity Imports GWh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Electricity Exports GWh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  Table 55: Projected electricity imports and exports (WAM) Electricity Interconnection Flows Between Ireland and: Unit 2018 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2040 UK Not including NI because of All-Island electricity system on Island of Ireland               Electricity Imports GWh 0 615 646 711 796 794 1,306 831 797 833 853 993 1,056 Electricity Exports GWh 0 2,216 2,262 2,194 2,179 2,286 3,950 4,548 4,770 4,892 4,732 4,555 4,750 France               Electricity Imports GWh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4,099 3,850 3,772 3,693 3,461 1,465 Electricity Exports GWh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,040 1,354 1,448 1,490 1,656 2,959  ii. Impacts on energy prices, utilities and energy market integration e via an underwater connection. Once built, its 700 megawatts capacity will power 450,000 households, and help Ireland achieve its climate and energy goals. As well as the clear benefits in terms of improved security and diversification of electricity supply, the Celtic Interconnector will also facilitate the further development of renewable energy, helping Ireland to meet its 70% target. By providing a direct electricity link with mainland Europe, t post the UKs exit. The Celtic Interconnector will help to lower electricity prices, reduce greenhouse gas emissions and provide greater energy security. To achieve its climate and energy goals, Europe needs to further develop cross-border electricity interconnections. The Celtic Interconnector project will help to meet these targets for interconnection which are key to the come onto the network, interconnection will also help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions associated with power generation in Europe. In addition, interconnection will increase the availability of renewable energy for European consumers as well as supporting European solidarity on energy, particularly in the case of unexpected energy events. iii. Where relevant, impacts on regional co-operation The Celtic Interconnector will allow Ireland and France to develop closer links and cooperate further in our efforts to achieve the ambitions of the Energy Union.  