  73 3.  3.1. Dimension Decarbonisation 3.1.1. GHG Emissions and Removals i. Policies and measures to achieve the target set under Regulation (EU) 2018/842 as referred in point 2.1.1 and policies and measures to comply with Regulation (EU) 2018/841, covering all key emitting sectors and sectors for the enhancement of removals, with an outlook to the long-term vision and goal to become a low emission economy and achieving a balance between emissions and removals in accordance with the Paris Agreement Building on the policy framework of the National Mitigation Plan and Project Ireland 2040, the Government published its Climate Action Plan in June 2019. The Plan identifies how Ireland will achieve its 2030 targets for greenhouse gas emissions which is also consistent with a trajectory to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. The Plan sets out over 180 actions, together with hundreds of sub-actions that need to be taken and embraces every relevant sector: electricity, enterprise, housing, heating, transport, agriculture, waste, and the public sector.  The Plan, which is to be annually updated and reported on quarterly, also includes actions to ensure that citizens become engaged and mobilised to take climate action, while ensuring that the necessary societal and economic transition that we have to make is fair, both in Ireland and globally. A National Dialogue on Climate Action had already been established to provide an opportunity to create awareness, engagement and motivation to act (locally, regionally and nationally) in relation to the challenges presented by climate change, and create structures and information flows to facilitate people gathering to discuss, deliberate and achieve consensus on appropriate responses to these challenges as well as enable and empower appropriate action. The Plan takes into account the outcomes from the Citizens' Assembly" as well as the work of the All-Party Committee on Climate Action. A Climate Action Delivery Board has been established to ensure coordination and accountability across Government on the various actions and to focus effectively on timely implementation.  Reflecting the central priority of climate change in our political and administrative systems into the future, the Plan sets out new governance arrangements including carbon-proofing our policies, establishment of carbon budgets, a strengthened Climate Change Advisory Council and greater accountability to the Parliament. A new legal framework will drive the   74 definition of targets and the governance process. In early 2020, the government published the general scheme of a new Climate Action Bill that will provide an unprecedented national legal basis for the setting of mitigation targets and the governance of climate policy. Under the proposed legislation, Ireland will adopt five-year carbon budgets at the national level following recommendations by a strengthened, statutorily independent Climate Action Council. Three five-year budgets (i.e. up to 2035 in the first instance) would be approved by the Government and by the Dáil. In addition, the Government is proposing to set target ranges and trajectories for each sector within the overall carbon budget. It is proposed that considerations, such as distributional effects and cost effectiveness, will be taken into account in the establishment of budgets and target ranges on the basis of criteria to be set out in the legislation. The governance of the plan will follow the approach successfully applied in the Action Plan for Jobs. A very detailed list of actions and measures are assigned at Department level and implementation will be monitored and reported on a quarterly basis under the supervision of the Department of the Taoiseach.  Some of the key measures set out in the Plan include:  Trajectory of carbon pricing to create behavioural change and avoid locking in carbon intensive technologies  Establish a system of 5-year carbon budgets and sectoral targets  Carbon proofing all government decisions and major investments  Establish a Just Transition Review Group  Every public body to adopt a Climate Action Mandate  A new Climate Action Act which will include a 2050 target  Establish a parliamentary Standing Committee on climate action  Eliminate non-recyclable plastic and impose higher fees on the production of materials which are difficult to recycle, implement measures to ban single-use plastic plates, cutlery, straws, balloon sticks and cotton buds   Increasing the penetration of renewable electricity to 70%  Phasing out coal and peat fired generation  Putting in place a coherent support scheme for micro-generation with a price for selling power to the grid  Setting stricter requirements for new buildings and substantial refurbishments  Designing policy to upgrade 500,000 homes to BER B2   75  Building a supply chain and a model for aggregation where home retrofits are grouped together  Accelerating the penetration of electric vehicles into sales of cars and vans and deliver a nationwide charging network  Expanding the network of cycling paths and "Park and Ride" facilities  Making growth less transport intensive through better planning, remote working and modal shift  Deliver substantial verifiable GHG abatement through adoption of a specified range of improvements in farming practice in line with recommendations from Teagasc  Promoting the increased use of domestic harvested wood in longer lived products, which will enhance the storage of carbon in these products and act as a substitute for materials with a higher carbon intensity.   Deliver expansion of forestry planting and soil management to ensure that carbon abatement from land-use is delivered in 2021-30 and in the years beyond; and  Support diversification within Agriculture and land use to develop sustainable and circular value chains and business models for lower carbon intensity farming The following sections provide an overview of the various actions covering all key emitting sectors.  Electricity Generation Energy is indispensable to contemporary social and economic functioning, while energy policy seeks to balance the sometimes competing aspects of sustainability, competitiveness and security of supply. Given the scale, scope and extent of energy use, it inevitably has significant environmental aspects including greenhouse gas emissions arising from power generation, heating anplay a key role in the transition towards a sustainable, secure and competitive energy system. A key sector in this transition is electricity generation which since 2005, has been subject to  While representing just under a third of emissions from the energy sector, electricity has been an area of considerable decarbonising success and a target area for future progress. Under the Renewable Energy Directive 2009/28/EC, Ireland is legally bound to deliver 16% of its final energy requirements from renewable sources by 2020. Ireland has committed to meeting this overall renewable target by achieving 40% renewable electricity, 12%   76 renewable heat and 10% renewable transport by 2020. Some of the key actions for the Electricity Generation sector include:   Increase electricity generated from renewable sources to 70%, underpinned by the Renewable Electricity Support Scheme (RESS)  Streamline consenting and connection arrangements  Phase-out of coal and peat-fired electricity generation  Introduce a support scheme for micro-generation  Facilitate community participation in renewable generation under the Renewable Electricity Support Scheme  Provide funding supports for new technologies onshore and off-shore  Ensure that 15% of electricity demand is met by renewable sources contracted under Corporate PPAs  Deliver Smart Metering Programme in line with current timelines  Support the ocean energy research, development and demonstration pathway for emerging marine technologies and associated test infrastructure Built Environment Improving energy efficiency is central to the transition to a low carbon economy. Using less energy, and using it in a more flexible way, is the most cost-effective and accessible way to tackle climate change. This is why conserving energy is the first step to take in the process of decarbonising the built environment. In addition, the more energy use is reduced through efficiency measures, the lower the effort required to achieve renewable energy targets.  The Energy White Paper recognises that in terms of energy efficiency, attaining the objective of a low carbon future will involve radically changing behaviour as citizens, industry and Government and becoming significantly more energy efficient. Energy efficiency upgrades to the fabric of buildings by for example, carrying out works such as insulation and airtightness reduces the amount of energy needed for heating and cooling and reduces the CO2 emissions connected with our energy use in those homes and workplaces. However, this is just the first step. To actually decarbonise the built environment, the switch from using fossil fuel as the source for the energy used in buildings to alternative energy sources will be vital. There are two main options for switching away from fossil fuels: renewable fuels such as biomass or electrification of heat using technologies such as heat pumps. However, it is critical that the fabric of a building is upgraded first so that the desired levels of comfort and   77 function are maintained in homes and workplaces when a less energy intensive renewable support for energy efficiency upgrades and will continue to define the ongoing development of measures to combine energy efficiency improvements with the fuel switching necessary to make real progress on decarbonising IrelandSome of the key actions for the Built Environment sector include:  Stricter requirements for new buildings and substantial refurbishments  Design policy to upgrade 500,000 homes to B2 Building Energy Rating (BER)  Install 600,000 renewable energy heating sources  Build a supply chain and a model for aggregation where home retrofits are grouped together to allow this level of activity to be funded and delivered  Develop a plan to ensure that the grant schemes, new finance models and the delivery system are effectively integrated  Skill-up current contractors/other industry players in deep retrofit, NZEB and new technology installations  Develop a policy framework for the development of district heating   Increase the number of Sustainable Energy Communities to 1,500  A target of 30% reduction in CO2eq emissions by 2030 and a 50% improvement in public sector energy efficiency  Increase attention to Energy and Carbon ratings in all aspects of managing property assets Transport transport sector where the use of fossil fuels is firmly embedded in driving culture and travel demand is increasing in response to population and economic growth. To address the challenge of transitioning from conventionally fuelled vehicles to alternative fuels and technologies an ambitious national target was established whereby all new cars sold in Ireland will be zero carbon emission or zero emission-capable by 2030 as well as many of our public transport buses and rail lines. The ultimate aim is to decarbonise the national passenger car fleet by 2050 and increase the use of alternative fuels in the freight sector. A mix of further measures, developments and initiatives will be needed to continue to respond to the climate challenge into the future. New technology deployment and   78 behavioural change initiatives need to be advanced across the transport sector, stimulating changes to the way people travel and the types and amounts of fuels that are used. Further measures being progressed are the implementation of the National Planning Framework, which aims to ensure better integration of land use and transport planning policy in order to reduce commuter travel demand and support more efficient patterns of development and travel; increasing public transport capacity and securing a shift, where feasible alternatives exist, away from private car use; encouraging the take-up of alternative fuels to petrol and diesel; and the increase of the obligation under the Biofuels Obligation Scheme to further reduce the concentration of high-emitting fuels. In addition, the potential role of taxation, the impact of eco-driving and driving behaviours are all also being examined and advanced. Alongside national policy objectives, the transport sector is also bound by certain commitments at EU level. The Renewable Energy Directive specifies a legally binding 10% renewable energy in transport target to be achieved by all Member States by 2020. The Biofuels Obligation Scheme is the primary mechanism being deployed to achieve this target by 2020. Progress is being made in increasing the shartransport energy. By end 2017 this share was 4.1% or 7.4% as applied in accordance with the Directive. Some of the key actions for the Transport sector include:  Accelerate the penetration of electric vehicles so that 936,000 will be on the road by 2030, underpinned by policy tools such as vehicle and fuel taxation measures, and a strong carbon tax trajectory  Make growth less transport intensive through better planning as set out in the National Planning Framework, remote working and greater modal shift through the delivery of major projects such as the BusConnects Programme  Increase the renewable biofuel content of motor fuels underpinned by the biofuels obligation scheme  Set targets for the conversion of public fleets underpinned by a Green Public Procurement Framework and a public sector mandate  Build electric vehicle charging network to stay ahead of demand with support being provided under the Climate Action Fund and coupled with clear planning rules that facilitate installation  a Park-and-Ride development office and a cycling project office within the National Transport Authority (NTA)     79 Agriculture, Forestry and Land Use The long term vision, as per our 2014 National Policy Position, for the agriculture, forest and land use sectors is based on an approach to carbon neutrality in these sectors, which does not compromise our capacity for sustainable food production. This effectively means that agricultural emissions are balanced by reducing emissions of methane, nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide in so far as the best available science allows, increasing carbon-sequestration through forests and land use and displacing fossil fuel and energy intensive materials with renewable sources. This vision aligns with the Paris Agreement, European Council Conclusions of October 2014 and also the Programme for a Partnership Government which sets out the objective to be achieved in this sector as to balance the control of agricultural emissions with the economic and social objective of promoting the sustainable development of a rural economy.  The Irish agriculture sector is committed to sustainability so that Ireland can play its part in obligations. The sector is also committed, through proactive use of research, technology and institutional arrangements, to demonstrate how sustainable agricultural and land management and resource efficiency can reduce emissions while improving the resilience of food production systems and contributing to climate action. The sector must be in a position to anticipate and adapt to the negative impacts of climate change in order to build resilience and enable sustainable development.  The scale of the challenge facing the sector in this regard is recognised at national, EU and international levels, with increasing emphasis on linking additional demand for food, fuel and fibre production in the sector with improving environmental credentials. The multiple objectives of the agriculture and land use sector with their lower mitigation potential were clearly recognised in the October 2014 European Council Conclusions. In Ireland, the sector not only produces sustainable food products, displaces fossil fuels and energy intensive materials through supply of biomass and wood products; it also sequesters carbon while providing other essential eco system services including those related to water and biodiversity. The development of the Irish agriculture sector is supported by the European ulture Policy (CAP) through a combination of direct payments to farmers, financial assistance towards investments in rural development and environmental protection and market support measures. Some of the key actions in the Agriculture, Forestry and Land Use sector include:  Deliver substantial verifiable greenhouse gas abatement through adoption of a specified range of improvements in farming practice, including through implementing   80 the full suite of cost-effective, on-farm abatement measures identified by Teagasc in their 2018 report. Some of the key measures identified in the Teagasc report include: o accelerated gains in the genetic merit of dairy cows o improved beef genetics o extended grazing o improved nitrogen (N) use efficiency o inclusion of clover in pasture swards o altered fertilizer formulation o improved animal health  Deliver expansion of forestry planting and soil management to ensure that carbon abatement from land-use is delivered in 2021-30 and in the years beyond. To include: o an average of 8,000 ha per annum of newly planted forest, and sustainable forest management of existing forests, including the increased use of harvested wood products o at least 40,000 ha per annum of reduced management intensity of grasslands on drained organic soils o better management of grasslands, tillage land and non-agricultural wetlands   Develop exemplar networks with leaders in adopting best practice to improve soil fertility and optimise fertiliser use leading to reduced greenhouse gas emissions and enhanced carbon sequestration in soil/biomass  Implement and review roadmap for achieving afforestation rates as outlined in the Programme for Government and Forestry Programme Mid-Term Review  Support diversification within Agriculture and land use to develop sustainable and circular value chains and business models for lower carbon intensity farming including organic production and protection and enhancement of biodiversity and water quality; and the production of bio-based products and bioenergy through the Common Agricultural Policy and implementation of the National Policy Statement on the Bioeconomy  National Bioeconomy Implementation Group to examine sectoral coherence, network and awareness raising, research and innovation and the circular bioeconomy potential of harnessing the value from side-streams from both agriculture and forestry   81  Actively engage all stakeholders to develop a roadmap to ensure the future development of the agriculture and land-use (including forestry) sector will be built on targets   Upskill farmers and foresters to ensure they have the knowledge and tools required to implement climate mitigation practices  Set a target for the level of energy to be supplied by indigenous biomethane injection in 2030, taking account of the domestic supplies of feedstock that meet strict sustainability criteria and consider how the supports necessary to reach such a target would be funded  Other Sectors The Plan also includes actions in relation to other sectors of the economy which have an important role to play such as enterprise and the waste sector. Key actions in these sectors include:  Develop coherent Reduction Strategies for Plastics, Food Waste and Resource Use  Increase the level and the quality of recycling with less contamination and greater replacement of virgin materials by recycling  Reduce the reliance on landfill with sharp reductions in plastics and compatibles entering landfill  Embed energy efficiency, replacement of fossil fuels, careful management of materials and waste and carbon abatement across all enterprises and public service bodies  Mobilise clusters regionally and sectorally to become centres of excellence for the adoption of low carbon technologies  Develop networks in key industry sectors and a roadmap of actions to support decarbonisation of large industry  Expand the EXEED (Excellence in Energy Efficient Design) programme to influence and deliver new best practices in energy efficient design ii. Where relevant, regional co-operation in the area Details of regional co-operation under the five energy dimensions, including detail on the North Seas Energy Co-operation, the Clean Energy for EU Islands Initiative, the British-Irish Council and interconnection co-operation are set out under the relevant sections. Co-  82 operation in these forums contributes to our long-term vision and goal to become a low emission economy.  iii. Without prejudice to the applicability of State aid rules, financing measures, including Union support and the use of Union funds, in this area at national level, where applicable The National Development Plan 2018-2027 provides an allocation of  The Climate Action Fund was approved by Government in May 2018 and will, over the climate and energy targets in a cost effective manner or offer the potential for innovative interventions in these sectors and which, in the absence of support from the Fund, would not otherwise be developed. The Government Decision also approved the repurposing of part of the existing petroleum products levy (also known at the National Oil Reserves Agency or NORA levy) to provide financing to the Climate Action Fund. In July 2018, the first Call for Appbeing provided to seven successful projects. The Climate Action Plan sets out that the next call for applications will commence by the end of 2019 with further calls to take place in future years. Financing the domestic transition envisaged under the Climate Action Plan as well as the agenda under Article 2 of the Paris Agreement on making finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development is an important issue for Ireland. On the private sector side, green and sustainable finance is an emerging high-growth international financial services sub-sector. Importantly from a financial markets perspective the significant funding requirement to achieve this transition to sustainable climate resilient world is well recognised. Over the next 15 years, the G20 estimates that the world will need to invest around US$90 trillion in sustainable infrastructure assets.  Turning to state-funded green finance, Ireland has a strong record of supporting international climate action, making significant advances in the delivery of climate finance in recent years. A consistent approach to programming climate support, based on policy prioritisation on addressing climate finance, is improving the predictability of Irish climate finance. The is provided through Irish Aid. The proposed contributions to be provided by the Irish   83 Government as contributions towards the $100bn goal entail an additional contribution by Ireland towards this goal. Further financing measures relevant to this area are set out in the following sections.  3.1.2. Renewable Energy i. Policies and measures to achieve the national contribution to the binding 2030 Union target for renewable energy and trajectories as referred to in point (a)(2) Article 4, and where applicable or available, the elements referred to in point 2.1.2 of this Annex, including sector-and technology-specific measures Harnessing Renewable Energy Through Support Schemes Ireland will continue to operate the existing support schemes for renewable electricity until the contracted support period ends, these schemes (which are now closed for new applicants) include:  the Alternative Energy Requirement (AER) scheme - closed,   three Renewable Electricity Support schemes (REFIT 1, 2 and 3) The AER scheme was launched by the then Department of Transport, Energy and Communications in 1996 and was the first step towards a market support for wind energy as  (When planning those measures, Member States shall take into account the end of life of existing installations and the potential for repowering) of electricity from renewable resources. The programme involved the tendering for contracts of certain fixed amounts of capacity, by potential renewable energy generators. The AER will remain in place until 2021. REFIT 1, was open for applications until 31 December 2009. The technologies covered in REFIT 1 are small wind (< 5MW), large wind (>5MW), Hydroelectricity and Biomass/Landfill gas. The support is provided for a period of 15 years. Due to delays in grid rollout for REFIT 1 projects, and with State Aid approval in August 2013, the backstop date for REFIT 1 was extended by two years to 2027.  REFIT 2, which succeeded REFIT 1, came into operation in March 2012. It provides for up to 4,000MW of renewable generation. The technologies covered are small wind (< 5MW), large wind (>5MW), Hydroelectricity and Biomass/Landfill gas. The backstop date for REFIT 2 is 2032 and the scheme closed to new applications in 2015.  REFIT3 aims to support the addition of 310MW of biomass technologies including anaerobic digestion (AD) and Combined Heat and Power (CHP). CHP is the simultaneous generation of useable heat and electricity in a single process and is regarded as a highly efficient   84 energy production process. It makes use of the heat produced in electricity generation instead of releasing it into the atmosphere. The heat generated in a CHP plant can be used for many purposes including district heating and displacing industrial heat demand. The backstop date for REFIT 3 is 2030 and the scheme closed to new applications in 2015. The new Renewable Electricity Support Scheme (RESS) is being developed under the aegis of the Climate Action Plan and commits to 70% of electricity from renewable sources by 2030. The RESS has been designed within a competitive auction-based, cost effective framework and the Scheme will provide for a renewable electricity (RES-E) ambition of 70% by 2030. The new RESS is already expected to support up to an additional 4.5 GW of renewable electricity by 2030, while ensuring citizens and communities can fully participate in the future energy transition in Ireland. The Scheme aims to deliver a broader range of objectives including:  Providing pathways and supports for communities to participate in renewable energy projects   Broadening the renewable technology mix (the diversity of technologies)   Increasing energy security, energy sustainability and ensuring the cost effectiveness of energy policy. We will increase the volumes and frequencies of the RESS auctions to deliver on the 70% renewable electricity target by 2030. Reaching 70% renewable electricity on the grid will be evels of renewable penetration. Stakeholder briefings took place in September and November 2019 on the first RESS auction.  The terms and conditions of the first RESS auction were published in February 2020 with the qualification window to open in June 2020 subject to the state aid notification process with the EU Commission. The qualification process for RESS 1 began at the end of 2019 with participants being briefed on the auction and qualification procedures and the publication of the detailed timetable for the auction. The target date for the auction bidding process is June 2020. This first auction under RESS is expected to procure between 1,000 and 3,000 GWh with the final auction quantity determined by competition analysis determined by the Commission for Regulation of Utilities (CRU). The RESS will include a range of measures to support community participation including a proposed category for community owned projects and a citizen investment scheme.    85 There will be approximately six RESS auctions up to 2030. These auctions are expected to connect circa 13,000 GWh of renewable electricity. Various technology specific levers will be applied in the individual auctions to facilitate diversity of renewable technologies and also increased community participation. These levers include a solar preference category and community projects preference category in the first RESS auction subject to State Aid approval. Future levers may include offshore wind preference categories. Further detail on the community aspects of the RESS are set out below. Terms and conditions will be prepared for auctions to provide a route to market for offshore wind, see above textbox on RESS Auction. The second RESS auction is scheduled to commence qualification in 2021.  Alternative Routes to Market In addition to the RESS, subsidy free renewable energy through corporate power purchase agreements provide a route to market for renewable project developers in the shorter term providing them with a real opportunity to boost Ireland's renewable energy capacity in advance of the commencement of RESS. The Climate Action Plan commits to a 15% target for the renewable industry to develop projects through subsidy free corporate power purchase agreements.  Ireland has established a cross Government Steering Group to develop, effective policy tools to harness the significant potential of electricity demand from renewable sources. This will be based on input from the industry intensive stakeholder interactions with a report to be delivered by the SEAI in Q2 2020. This will be followed by the development of a Government Policy Paper based on consultancy study and Advisory Group Recommendations Paper in Q3 2020 and the implementation of relevant policy measures from Q4 2020. Offshore Wind Ireland is targeting at least 3.5 GW of offshore renewable energy of mainly offshore wind, the development of up to 1.5 GW of grid scale solar energy, and an increase in onshore wind capacity of up to 8.2 GW. This will be delivered in a competitive framework of auctions and corporate contracting with a renewed focus on community and citizen participation. Ireland has one of the best offshore renewable energy resources in the world with a sea area of 900,000 square kilometres which is approximately 10 times the size of our landmass. Becau at the Atlantic edge of the EU, we have more offshore energy potential than most other countries in Europe. Achieving 70% renewable electricity by 2030 will require us to build out significant infrastructures and the capacity to integrate new   86 productive in Europe, with a long-term potential of 70GW of ocean energy opportunity (wind, wave and tidal) within 100 km of the Irish coastline. bitions for the offshore renewable energy sector are contingent on delivering a licensing and regulatory regime for offshore renewable energy. This will provide certainty to project promoters and provide a pathway to realising the necessary investment in offshore which will be known as the National Marine Planning Framework (NMPF), will set out the Irish Government's long-term planning objectives and priorities for the management of our seas over a 20-year time frame. The plan will set out specific objectives and marine planning policies for all of the activities taking place in Ireland's seas, from aquaculture through to waste water treatment. All of these activities will be contextualised within the pillars of their economic, environmental and social considerations. The NMPF will also set out the proposed future approach to the adoption of spatial designations for marine activities including offshore renewable energy development, or designated marine protected areas, and taking account of the existing network of designated European sites under the Birds and Habitat Directives by the Minister for Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht. The Department of Housing, Planning & Local Government are currently preparing the Marine Planning and Development Management (MPDM) Bill. The MPDM Bill seeks to establish into law a new marine planning system, which is underpinned by a statutory Marine Planning Statement, and guided by the National Marine Planning Framework. It consists of a continental shelf administered by An Bord Pleanála and the coastal local authorities. It will provide a modern, up-to-date regulatory and marine planning framework for offshore renewable energy developments beyond the limits of the foreshore (12 nautical miles). This will be an important foundation for investment in the offshore renewable energy sector as well as providing a more transparent, participative system for all marine stakeholders. The MPDM will also streamline procedures using a single consent principle: one state consent (Maritime Area Consent: MAC) to enable occupation of the Maritime Area and one development consent (planning permission), with a single environmental assessment. The passage of the legislation has been prioritised to ensure that the new consenting model, as well as implementation of a new offshore grid connection policy that lines up with the RESS auction timeframes will ultimately deliver our 2030 targets.   (OREDP) published in 2014 -led projects for the development and deployment of ocean energy devices and systems. The OREDP identifies resources for   87 increasing indigenous production of renewable electricity, contributing to reductions in our greenhouse gas emissions, improving the security of our energy supply and creating jobs in the green economy. The OREDP sets out key principles, policy actions and enablers for delivery of Ireland's significant potential in this area. The development of a new Offshore Renewable Energy Development Plan is due to commence in 2020. The new OREDP will nable development of our abundant offshore renewable energy resources.  In line with our commitment in Future Jobs Ireland 2019, a Top Team has been established for offshore renewables to provide a multi-organisational response to leveraging the industrial/employment opportunities arising from the operationalisation of the offshore energy policy framework under the MPDM legislation. Ireland will examine the increased use of cross border joint co-operation mechanisms for funding renewables, particularly offshore wind, to reduce the cost impacts on Irish consumers and businesses, including for hybrid assets as part of the North Seas Energy Co-operation Initiative.  There will be three phases to developing offshore wind in Ireland.  Phase 1 represents the foundations and early projects for offshore wind and will take place in the first half of the decade. There will be several key actions and milestones required during this phase. We will need to ensure that MPDM has been enacted to allow for a consenting regime for offshore wind. We will require two offshore auctions to take place to provide a support mechanism for offshore wind projects using the RESS framework. The main focus area for fixed bottom offshore wind development in Ireland up to 2030 will be the Irish Sea East coast due to the relatively favourable sea depth and wave conditions, the more developed and robust onshore transmission system and the close location to big electricity demand growth centres.  A revision of the OREDP in conjunction with the Marine Spatial Plan will help identify suitable areas for future offshore wind projects. As we move to this plan-led approach, Ireland will designate an Offshore Renewable Energy Development Body. This Body will undertake grid development which may include site selection and securing necessary permissions in relation to the grid connection to facilitate further ORE development by third party developers. Phase 2 focuses on achieving our 2030 target of at least 3.5GW of offshore wind to be operational and moving towards full decarbonisation. The Irish Government recognises that to realise the enormous potential of the offshore energy sector will require fully coordinated support across government, from research and development, through supply chain development, to commercial deployment. In the latter part of the decade, Ireland will focus   88 on plan-led offshore wind projects using sites previously identified for development, including on the South and West Coast. We will look to demonstrate floating wind in Irish waters building on the experience of the AFLOWT (Accelerating market uptake of Floating Wind Technology) project, which is a 5-year project with the objective of testing a full-scale floating turbine in the Atlantic Marine Test Site (AMETS) off the West Coast in 2022/23, subject to consent. A third auction will be held in the second half of the decade which between all three planned auctions will provide a total of between 3.5 and 5 GW of offshore wind operational in Irish waters by 2030. In the latter part of the decade we will examine new technologies and plan for how best to incorporate these new technologies including the future role of hydrogen.  Phase 3 looks beyond 2030 and our longer-term options. At this stage, Ireland will be in a position to deploy commercially operating floating windfarms. The South and West coast will, in time, be more suitable for floating offshore wind development which will favour our deeper and more exposed sea conditions. Ireland will scale offshore renewable energy to fully decarbonise electricity generation in Ireland. This will allow us to examine whether any surplus generated could be used for interconnection with another market or for export alone. We will demonstrate new green technologies such as the generation of green hydrogen as a by-product from offshore wind.  Wind Energy Development Guidelines (WEDG) Updated Wind Energy Guidelines are expected to be published by the Department of Planning, Housing & Local Government in H1 2020 following the conclusion of a strategic environmental assessment process. A key aspect of the new Guidelines will be new noise regulations for wind turbines that are in line with World Health Organisation recommendations. The Guidelines will also set out clear rules for planning authorities to follow regarding early community engagement and community benefit measures for on shore wind farms.  In addition, the DCCAE is working collaboratively with Local Authorities and the EPA on the most suitable approach to noise monitoring and enforcement for wind energy with a focus on a flexible and enforceable approach. This may potentially include a regional structure that waste management and climate adaptation.  Renewable Electricity Policy and Development Framework (REPDF) Ireland is developing a framework, known as the Renewable Electricity Policy and Development Framework (REPDF) that will guide the development of renewable electricity projects on land which are key objectives of Irish energy policy. The framework will identify   89 strategic areas on land for large-scale renewable generation (50MW+) with this analysis including a spatial component. In addition, the scope will include renewable electricity projects below this threshold (including Wind and Solar PV) at a national level. It is intended to go to public consultation in Q2 2020 with the framework being finalised in H2 2020. Microgeneration Scheme In July 2018 the Government announced a new pilot scheme to support microgeneration. This first phase of support for microgeneration is targeting solar PV installation and domestic customers for self-available (max 4kWp + battery) for homes built pre 2011. The new solar PV support scheme also aligns with the recast Renewable Energy Directive heart of new energy policy across the EU. Demand for the scheme from residential consumers has been very high to date. A Microgeneration Working Group has been set up with key stakeholders under the Climate Action Plan to assess the most appropriate enabling framework for microgeneration within relevant market segments in order to deliver a support system by June 2021. Increased Electricity Interconnection Electricity interconnection is strategically important to Ireland, having a potentially substantial  sustainability, security of supply and competitiveness. Interconnection also supports the energy transition and may have a variety of wide-ranging benefits to the Irish consumer, including lower long term costs of electricity through connection to a larger market and diversity of electricity supply.  With a number of forthcoming interconnection proposals allied to strong national and EU policy backing, a new national policy statement on electricity interconnection in Ireland was published in July 2018. This policy statement lays out the official policy position on electricity interconnection. It outlines the many drivers and benefits of interconnection, as well as the potential impacts electricity interconnection may have on the wider energy market. It guides potential developers in better understanding the range of national policy drivers and the CRU interconnection, by drawing attention to key policy parameters for consideration in its evaluation of interconnection applications from project promoters.  The East West interconnector is a 500MW interconnector that has been in operation since 2012 and allows for the trading of electricity between the island of Ireland and British wholesale electricity markets. Within the Single Electricity Market there is an existing North South interconnector usually operating at 300MW capacity and a second 1500MW North South interconnector is planned and has PCI status. There are also two proposed   90 interconnector projects. The first is the 700MW Celtic interconnector that will run to the south-west coast of France and the second is the 500MW Greenlink interconnector that will run to Pembroke in Wales.  Phasing Out Fossil Fuels Removing fossil fuels from the grid will be essential in the coming years. Ireland has  replace coal-fired generation with low-carbon and renewable technologies. Facilitating this is the recent reform of the EU Emissions Trading System (ETS) and changes to the electricity market in Ireland, along with the resulting price signals. The ESB is engaging with the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment regarding the future of Moneypoint. The recent announcement by the ESB that it is to close two of the three remaining peat generation facilities in Ireland by the end of 2020 means that the transition away from peat will happen sooner than expected.  Mitigating measures to ensure that impacts on regional employment in the affected regions where peat and coal fired electricity generation is phased out will be critical to ensuring a just transition. Initiatives, such as including the Midlands Region in the EU Coal Regions in Transition Platform, and implementing a wider cross-Government policy framework supporting employment in the region, will ensure a just transition.  Biofuels The Biofuels Obligation Scheme was introduced in 2010 and requires suppliers of road transport fuels to include a certain percentage of environmentally sustainable biofuels across their general fuel mix. It is administered by the National Oil Reserves Agency. The level of obligation has increased over time and, since January 2019, it has been set at 10% by volume. The obligation will increase to 11% by volume from January 2020. The obligation will increase to 11% by volume from January 2020. This is expected to lead to circa 5% biofuel in petrol and an average 6% biofuel blend in diesel by 2020. The Climate Action Plan diesel by 2030  a doubling of the 2020 level. It is expected that the Biofuels Obligation Scheme will ensure an increase in the level of biofuel every two years (i.e. in 2022, 2024, 2026, 2028 and 2030) from 2020 to 2030 on a relatively linear basis. The Biofuels Obligation Scheme will also support the uptake of other low emission fuels in the transport sector including bio-CNG, bio-LNG and hydrogen produced from renewable sources. A public consultation which closed in November 2019 will help inform how this ambition will be delivered and elements of the recast Renewable Energy Directive that relate to the transport sector will be implemented.    91 District Heating  The Climate Action Plan sets out the need to ensure a suitable policy framework is in place to support district heating. A public consultation commenced at the end of 2019 with a policy framework to be in place by the end of 2020. The National Planning Framework also highlights the role of district heating in developing sustainable compact urban growth  in particular in relation to the cities of Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Galway and Waterford. An updated Comprehensive Assessment (set out under Article 14 of the Energy Efficiency Directive (EED) and required to be completed by the end of 2020) will help inform the potential locations for district heating in Ireland. The Climate Action Fund is providing support to two projects (the Dublin District Heating System in central Dublin and the Tallaght District Heating System in a suburb of Dublin). ii. Where relevant, specific measures for regional co-operation, as well as, as an option, the estimated excess production of energy from renewable sources which could be transferred to other Member States in order to achieve the national contribution and trajectories referred to in point 2.1.2 North Seas Energy Co-operation (NSEC)  The North Seas Energy Co-operation works to increase electricity transmission capacity among the countries involved as well as to the rest of Europe. The NSEC aims to ensure a sustainable, secure and affordable energy supply in the North Seas region through further integration of wholesale electricity markets. A key element in this integration is to increase the interconnection between countries in the region that could be promoted through the NSEC. Furthermore, Ireland is committed to exploring further opportunities for hybrid interconnection/offshore assets as part of the NSEC and to implement regulatory arrangements to support new interconnection, including hybrid assets as set out in Action 23 of the Climate Action Plan.  Cross Border Participation in Support Schemes As part of the design of the RESS, Ireland is committed to opening the scheme to participants from other European Member States with whom Ireland has a direct electricity connection, provided a co-operation agreement has been signed by both parties.  It is expected that Producers located in other European Member States (or in a neighbouring State with which a free trade agreement exists) will be allowed to bid for a certain percentage of the capacity allocated within the tenders. The support quota for each participating member state will be based on the volume of imported electricity, the RES-e   92 share in total final electricity consumption of that country and the total final electricity consumption in Ireland.  The participation of producers from other States in the RESS is subject to the following conditions:   a co-operation agreement with the relevant State is in place; the co-operation agreement describes the rules to prove physical delivery of the green electricity; and  the projects in the relevant State fulfil the same requirements as the projects located in Irish territory iii. Specific measures on financial support, where applicable, including Union support and the use of Union funds, for the promotion of the production and use of energy from renewable sources in electricity, heating and cooling, and transport Many of the measures and schemes set out in the preceding sections are considered financial supports including, the Climate Action Fund, the Support Scheme for Renewable Heat and the supports provide to incentivise the uptake of electric vehicles and other low emission vehicles (LEVs). There are no European funds involved in these measures to date.  The costs of the AER and REFIT schemes are recovered directly from electricity consumers through an annual public service obligation (PSO) levy, payable by all electricity consumers. While these schemes are all now closed to new applicants, support will be provided to projects under these various schemes each of which have different end points (2021 to 2032). Regarding the schemes being developed, the RESS, which will be funded through the PSO levy, will commence in Q1 2020 with operational aid payable for up to 16.5 years.  As regards the support measures for electric vehicles, a number of measures are Exchequer-funded, while others are taxation and licensing measures.  iv. Where applicable, the assessment of the support for electricity from renewable sources that Member States are to carry out pursuant to Article 6(4) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 This assessment on the effectiveness of the support scheme will be undertaken for the RESS within five years of the operation of the scheme.   93 v. Specific measures to introduce one or more contact points, streamline administrative procedures, provide information and training, and facilitate the uptake of power purchase agreements These measures will be developed as part of the implementation of Articles 15 and 16 of the recast Renewable Energy Directive. As stated above, Ireland will develop effective policy 2030 electricity demand from renewable sources. The MPDM Bill will significantly streamline ORE procedures by a single consent principle: one state consent (Maritime Area Consent: MAC) to enable occupation of the Maritime Area and one development consent (planning permission), with a single environmental assessment.  Summary of the policies and measures under the enabling framework Member States have to put in place pursuant to Article 21(6) and Article 22(5) of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 to promote and facilitate the development of self-consumption and renewable energy communities Ireland to support up to 10% community renewable electricity projects by 2030. This policy objective is in line with the Clean Energy Package, in particular the recast Renewable Energy Directive (Article 22 Renewable Energy Communities). The High-Level Design of the RESS was approved by Government in July 2018. The RESS is being designed to deliver a broad range of policy objectives including:    Broadening the renewable electricity technology mix, the diversity of technologies  Increasing energy security, energy sustainability and ensuring the cost effectiveness of energy policy  The provision of pathways and supports for communities to participate in renewable energy projects There are four pillars to the community framework which is subject to EU state aid approval:  Preference for Community Projects in RESS auctions - It is proposed that for all RESS auctions there will be a preference for community-led projects   Community Benefit Fund (CBF) - A mandatory Community Benefit Fund must be provided by all projects successful in a RESS auction. The contribution is to be set at energy, energy efficiency measures and climate action initiatives    94  Investment opportunities - The RESS will mandate that Irish citizens or communities will have access to investment opportunities in renewable energy projects, prioritising those citizens that live in closer proximity to the projects   Community Supports - The Community Framework is in essence an enabling framework to encourage the development of a meaningful community electricity generation sector. Measures included within this framework will consist of: o Financial supports including grants and soft loans o A trusted intermediary network to/ work with communities through the various stages of projects o A trusted advisor network to be available to them to give them specialist advice such as legal and financial. o A trusted information source for a vari- o A central point of contact organisation to co-ordinate all of these enabling services  vi. Assessment of the necessity to build new infrastructure for district heating and cooling produced from renewable sources As set out above, a new policy framework is currently being developed to support the uptake of district heating in Ireland. District heating and cooling in Ireland is at a very low level and is estimated at most at about 0.8% of heat consumption. In addition, structural barriers arise  vii. Where applicable, specific measures on the promotion of the use of energy from biomass, especially for new biomass mobilisation taking into account:  Biomass availability, including sustainable biomass: both domestic potential and imports from third countries  Other biomass uses by other sectors (agriculture and forest-based sectors); as well as measures for the sustainability of biomass production and use The Support Scheme for Renewable Heat incentivises the installation and use of biomass and anaerobic digestion heating systems. The scheme includes detailed sustainability criteria in line with the recast Renewable Energy Directive. Government will continue financial supports for the continued mobilisation of biomass from forests by providing assistance for measures such as forest road construction, knowledge transfer groups and decision support tools. Wood fibre used for energy generation will   95 continue to be used in the forest products sector to dry sawn timber reducing the dependency on fossil fuels. Use of biomass for heat and electricity generation will continue to use small diameter material which facilitates the sustainable management of forests where harvesting is regulated by the Forestry Act 2014. Forests felled are replanted ensuring that biomass is harvested from sustainable resources. The Irish Forest estate is forecasted to increase the supply of wood biomass for energy and wood-based panels from 1.8 million cubic metres currently, to over 4 million cubic metres by 2035. Significantly more volumes in excess of these figures will be used by the sawmilling sector. Where demand exceeds available domestic supply biomass and will be imported from third countries from sustainable sources which also must satisfy the requirements of the EU timber regulation.  Planned increases in afforestation as set out in Irelands Climate Action Plan will take place while protecting and increasing the levels of biodiversity. All land converted to forestry is regulated by the requirements of the Forestry Act 2014 and adherence to a suite of environmental requirements which aims inter alia to protect existing water courses, biodiversity and archaeology. All land use change to forestry requires a detailed assessment by the competent authority to ensure that there are no significant impacts on statutory designations as regulated by the Habitats Directive.  3.1.3. Other Elements of the Dimension i. Where applicable, national policies and measures affecting the EU ETS sector and assessment of the complementarity and impacts on the EU ETS The EU Emissions Trading System (ETS) includes some 11,000 stationary installations (over 100 currently in operation in Ireland of which approximately 70 are industrial installations) with an installed power-generation capacity of more than 20 megawatts; Irish-based ETS plants are mainly in power-generation and large-scale industrial production. The system covers emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) from power and heat generation and a wide range of energy-intensive industry sectors including oil refineries, steel works and production of iron, aluminium, metals, cement, lime, glass, ceramics, pulp, paper, cardboard, acids and bulk organic chemicals. Nitrous oxide emissions from the production of certain acids and emissions of perfluoro-carbons from aluminium production are also included. Since the start of 2012, emissions from all flights from, to and within the European Economic Area (EEA) are included in the EU ETS. The legislation, adopted in 2008, applies to EU and non-EU airlines alike, and all Irish-based carriers above the ETS threshold must participate fully in the Scheme. The EU ETS, now in its third phase, covers about 45% of total EU emissions, but just 26% of total emissions in Ireland, based on the latest (2018) inventories published by the Irish   96 Environmental Protection Agency in October 2019. The relatively small share of total greenhouse gas emissions which the ETS sector in Ireland accounts for is owing to the relatively light industrial base in Ireland and the disproportionately large agricultural sector for which emissions are captured in the non-ETS inventory. Emissions from the ETS sector have been rising in recent years in Ireland; this is most likely attributable to the recession and decreased output from industry during 2009-2013 and the subsequent pent-up demand that industry is now attempting to satisfy. As the carbon price in ETS rises, the decarbonisation signal for ETS participants will become stronger, incentivising additional efficiency improvements in capital stock. Revenues obtained from EU ETS auctioning are used by the Irish Exchequer to support green and climate-related activities and overseas climate financing as well as administration of the system. As the carbon price increases, auction revenues will also increase, affording increased opportunities for climate-related investments by Government. Between 2013 and 2017, auction revenues in Ireland amounted to between However, due to the large increase in the price of internationally traded carbon (i.e. emission 2018. Of the approximately 100 installations currently participating in EU ETS in Ireland, approximately 60 receive some form of free allowance allocation through the carbon leakage mechanism. In terms of national energy policies affecting the ETS sector, there are some measures aimed at power generation that are relevant. Ireland is currently developing a Renewable Electricity Support Scheme (RESS) to contribute to Ireland's 2020 renewable electricity targets and to deliver Ireland's renewable energy ambitions out to 2030. While RESS will incentivise the introduction of sufficient renewable generation to deliver national and EU-wide renewable energy and decarbonisation targets, there are other energy policy objectives such as broadening and diversifying the renewable technology mix, enhancing security of energy supply, promoting economic development, and supporting community and citizen participation in the transition to a low carbon economy, that must be met, while simultaneously delivering value for money for the consumer.  Renewable Heat (SSRH) is a government funded initiative designed to increase the energy generated from renewable sources in the heat sector. The scheme is open to commercial, industrial, agricultural, district heating, public sector and other non-domestic heat users. The primary objective of the support scheme for renewable heat is to increase the level of   97 renewable energy targets whilst also reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The government funded scheme will support the adoption of renewable heating systems by commercial, industrial, agricultural, district heating, public sector and other non-domestic heat users not covered by the emissions trading system. The scheme aims to bridge the gap between the installation and operating costs of renewable heating systems and the conventional fossil fuel alternatives; and incentivise the development and supply of renewable heat.  In addition, a Public Service Obligation (PSO) has operated in Ireland since 2001 to support certain conventional power-generation constructed for security of supply purposes, and for the development of renewable electricity. The levy compensates electricity suppliers for the additional costs they incur by purchasing electricity generated by these producers. This levy is vital to enable Ireland meet its target for electricity generated from renewable sources. ii. Policies and measures to achieve other national targets, where applicable Climate Adaptation In outAdaptation Framework (NAF) sets out a wide range of policies and measures. The Plan identifies 12 key sectors under the remit of 7 Government Ministers where sectoral adaptation plans will be prepared. Key policies and measures provided for under the NAF include:  Preparation of sectoral adaptation plans by 7 Government departments for 12 key sectors.  Putting in place revised governance and reporting arrangements  Formalising the status of existing adaptation guidelines and decision making supports - these include the online climate information platform Climate Ireland, adaptation planning guidelines for the 12 key sectors and local authority adaptation strategy development guidelines   Increasing awareness around climate adaptation and resilience  Integrating climate adaptation into key national plans and policies Sectoral plans were approved by Government in 2019. Plans were developed in line with the Sectoral Planning Guidelines for Climate Change Adaptationwere published in May 2018 to ensure that a coherent and consistent approach to the development of plans was taken across Government. Table 14 below sets out the sectors and lead Government departments that have prepared plans under the NAF. The NAF will be reviewed in line with current statutory requirements at least once before end 2023.   98 Table 14: Sectoral adaptation plans under the National Adaptation Framework Theme Sector Level Lead Department for Sectoral Adaptation Plans  Natural & Cultural Capital Seafood Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine Agriculture Forestry Biodiversity Department of Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht Cultural, Built and Archaeological Heritage Critical Infrastructure Transport infrastructure Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport Electricity and Gas Networks Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment Communications Networks Water Resource & Flood Risk Management Flood Risk Management  Office of Public Works Water Quality  Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government Water Services Infrastructure Public Health Health Department of Health  Chapter 16 of the Climate Action Plan 2019 covers climate adaptation, primarily in the context of the ongoing implementation of the NAF. For 2019, the actions in the Plan in relation to adaptation relate to the development of sectoral adaptation plans and local  Some sectors (i.e. Agriculture and Forestry; Transport; Electricity and Gas Networks and Flood Risk Management) also developed non-statutory plans during 2017 and 2018 under the 2012 National Climate Change Adaptation Framework. These plans were revised and updated in line with the requirements of the NAF and the Climate Act.  Institutional governance and monitoring - Since 2015 sectoral coordination of national adaptation policy has taken place under the auspices of the National Adaptation Steering Committee which is chaired by the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment. As a key action under the NAF, the National Adaptation Steering Committee has been reviewed and restructured to ensure that a coordinated, comprehensive and   99 coherent approach continues to operate in implementing actions under the NAF. The need for appropriate cross sectoral coordination and consultation is identified as crucial in the NAF and the Climate Act and the Steering Committee will have a key role to play in promoting and encouraging work in this regard.  Members of the Steering Committee include: Departments preparing sectoral plans under the NAF; Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade; Irish Water; EPA; regional and local government; the National Standards Authority of Ireland; and Met Éireann.  The National Adaptation Steering Committee reports to the Climate Action High Level Steering Group, which was established under the National Mitigation Plan and is chaired by the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment. Since summer 2018, this group now addresses both climate mitigation and adaptation. In terms of adaptation, the High Level Steering Group will:   Monitor progress by sectors and agencies in delivering on climate change adaptation actions for which they are responsible; and  Ensure that a coordinated and coherent approach is adopted and maintained towards achieving a climate resilient Ireland. Regional and local level adaptation  National climate action policy in Ireland recognises the potential which exists within the local government sector to contribute to the transition to a low carbon and climate resilient future. The NAF identifies the critical role to be played by local authorities in addressing climate change adaptation. In January 2018 the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment announced the pfunding over 5 years to the local authority sector to establish 4 Climate Action Regional Offices (CAROs). This commitment recognises the significant obligation which has been placed on local government to develop and implement its own climate action measures, as well as the need to build capacity within the sector to engage effectively with climate change  both in terms of mitigation and adaptation. The Climate Action Regional Offices are being operated by a lead local authority in 4 different regions grouped according to shared climate change risks. The establishment of these offices is enabling a more coordinated engagement across the whole of government and will help build on the experience and expertise which exists across the sector. Under the NAF the 31 local authorities in Ireland have developed their own adaptation strategies in line with guidelines to be developed for the sector (these are currently being reviewed and updated with a view to publication in Q4 2018). Work on the development of strategies was undertaken by individual local authorities with support from the Climate Action   100 Regional Office in their region. Local authorities have adopted their local adaptation strategies in 2019. Monitoring at local level  A National Local Authority Climate Change Steering Committee monitors the CAROs and implementation of their annual work programmes. The CAROs and the local authority sector are also integrated into national oversight bodies for climate action, with representatives on the National Adaptation Steering Committee, Climate Action High Level Steering Group and the Adaptation Committee of the Climate Change Advisory Council (CCAC).  Progress under EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change - Ireland is committed to ensuring comprehensive and transparent reporting on adaptation in line with the requirements of the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action Regulation and itments on adaptation under the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement.  As part of the EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change the Commission developed an adaptation preparedness scoreboard, which identifies key indicators for measuring Member performance under the indicators in the scoreboard completed in 2018 shows that Ireland has made significant progress in meeting many of the indicators under the scoreboard particularly in terms of putting in place the coordinating structure required for adaptation at national level, putting in place climate observations systems, filling knowledge gaps and in terms of knowledge transfer. The assessment did however show a number of indicators where progress is needed including in terms of integrating climate change into national disaster risk management plans, mainstreaming adaptation into insurance or alternative policy instruments and monitoring of progress on adaptation at local and regional level. Monitoring of local and regional adaptation has been considered above and the following discusses the areas of insurance and risk prevention and disaster risk management.  Alignment of Climate Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction  Recent reports and policy briefs from the European Environment Agency and the PLACARD (Platform for Climate Adaptation and Risk Reduction) project have noted that efforts to reduce disaster risk and at the same time adapt to a changing climate presents challenges and opportunities in both Europe and globally. The NAF acknowledges the requirement to enhance coherence and complementarity between the Paris Agreement, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction as well as the UN Sustainable Development Goals. Ways to enhance coherence between adaptation and disaster risk reduction policies and practices in Ireland have also been considered in   101 recent research reports published by the EPA in 2018. National and International research and best practice, such as the outcomes of PLACARD, will continue to inform Irish policy in this regard and work on policy integration and indicators are identified as future research priorities in the NAF.  The NAF recognises that effective climate adaptation can minimise risks and costs and also protect lives and property by building resilience into existing systems. This can ultimately help minimise the emergency response that is necessary in response to severe weather events.  In Ireland statutory responsibility for emergency planning lies across a number of Government departments. For example, the Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government is designated as the Lead Government Department for coordinating the Strategic Emergency Management National Structures and Framework sets out the national arrangements for the delivery of effective approach and the framework for achieving a systems approach to emergency management. Strategic Emergency Management (SEM) Guidelineswill include a Guideline on climate change. The NAF contaiplanning for extreme weather events including where plans related to emergencies assigned Management that sectors developing sectoral plans ensuring that plans related to emergencies assigned to a sectoral department as Lead Government Department under the Strategic Emergency Management National Structures and Framework are climate proofed. The NAF also identifies the need for climate research and modelling programmes should support climate adaptation by delivering climate services at a local level across all sectors of the economy, including emergency management. Local authorities are designated as the lead agency for coordinating and delivering the response on the ground to severe weather emergencies and lead the local response in collaboration with the other Principal Response Agencies  An Garda Síochána (Ireland's National Police Service) and the HSE (Health Services Executive). The Climate Action Regional Offices (CAROs) will further improve alignment between adaptation policy and emergency responses at local level.    102 The NAF identifies the importance of any developments in the area of emergency management undertaken in line with the NAF and recognises existing structures and the policies underpinning them at national level. The NAF therefore seeks to ensure coherence between how the impacts of climate change will influence responses to both adaptation planning and national emergency planning for extreme weather events. This approach will help to align with the key responsibilities outlined under the Strategic Emergency Management National Structures and Framework and the associated guidance documents. Insurance  The NAF recognises that the private sector has significant experience in quantifying, pricing, reducing risk and managing weather-related risks across the relevant sectors. In partnership with Government, therefore, it can play an important role in collecting and disseminating data on weather and catastrophe risk, financing risk assessments, and supporting the design and provision of insurance schemes. One project that sought to examine climate impacts on the insurance industry was the Adaptive Responses to Climate impacts (ARC) project. The aim of the ARC project, funded by the EPA, was to develop a framework for costing the impacts of climate change on the Irish economy and assessing the options for adaptation, with a specific focus on the role of key stakeholders. The study applied a framework to the specific case of flood risk in Cork and the South West region of Ireland. The ARC project included a stakeholder forum, comprised of policy makers, local authorities, business groups and the insurance industry, to assess information needs and concerns of those exposed to current and future climate risks. It proceeded to examine two parallel but interlinked strands of research:  Empirical estimates of the costs of climate impacts without adaptation, particularly focused on flooding; and   The range of adaptation options available, including the appropriate role for insurance  The outputs from this project included: costs of flooding; recommendations on the use of tools and methods for costing climate impacts; policy recommendations on the design of adaptation strategies; and implications for the private sector, including insurance.  The benefits of a proactive adaptive approach and the role of insurance in this is identified as a research priority under the NAF. Awareness raising is a key action under the NAF and part of this will help individuals and businesses to reduce their own risk profiles. Information platforms such as Climate Ireland can help address both of these issues by providing insures with more accurate information on households risk level e.g. through flood mapping while also supporting households in taking actions to lower their risk level.    103 The National Adaptation FraEU and National levels. Ireland will continue to meet its EU and International obligations on adaptation, including forthcoming requirements on adaptation under the EU Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action Regulation.  Biodiversity As set out under section 2.1.1(i), the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity needs to be escalated. Actions within the Biodiversity Sectoral Climate Change Adaptation Plan build on the foundations of the National Biodiversity Action Plan (2017- 2021) and are aimed at improving sustainable agriculture and fisheries, better soil and land management and, most urgently, the restoration of natural systems.  an is underpinned by seven strategic objectives approach to biodiversity, ensuring that efforts and achievements of the past are built upon, while looking ahead to what can be achieved over the next five years and beyond. The key policies under that Plan include:  Mainstreaming biodiversity across the decision-making process in the State  Strengthening the knowledge base underpinning work on biodiversity issues  Increasing public awareness and participation  Ensuring conservation of biodiversity in the wider countryside  Ensuring conservation of biodiversity in the marine environment  Expanding and improving on the management of protected areas and protected species  Enhancing the contribution to international biodiversity issues The Biodiversity Sectoral Climate Change Adaptation Plan was published in September 2019 and sets out the key goal of protecting biodiversity from the impacts of climate change and to conserve and manage ecosystems so that they deliver services that increase the adaptive capacity of people and biodiversity, while also contributing to climate change mitigation. A wide range of policies and measures are set out under the Adaptation Plan including 6 strategic objectives linked with the objectives under the action Plan. Some of the key measures under the Adaptation Plan include:  Restore and enhance natural systems through management to increase resilience  Establish and implement an all-island invasive species programme   104  Develop and implement a National Soil Strategy to increase the resilience of soils  Develop an integrated coastal management strategy which includes ecosystem based adaptation actions  Promote ecosystem restoration and conservation through Payment for Ecosystem Services and investment in actions that increase carbon sinks while promoting biodiversity  Carry out a comprehensive vulnerability assessment of biodiversity in Ireland  Develop an impact assessment tool to screen for potential maladaptation impacts  Design corridors and buffer zones to enhance the resilience of protected areas and designated sites by increasing opportunities for dispersal across the landscape  Implement measures to reduce the barrier effects of roads, railways and technical objects in rivers and streams to facilitate species spatial responses to climate change  Undertake natural capital accounting in all sectors to ensure natural capital is being valued and Ecosystem Based Adaptation and green infrastructure options are being employed  Circular Economy  Ireland is committed to leading the transformation from waste management to circular economy practice through delivery of a new national policy. Ireland has scope for major progress in all of the key areas of the waste hierarchy. A number of commitments have been made under the recent Climate Action Plan and these will be elaborated on further under the revised national waste policy in 2020. Key objectives already committed to and underway are:  Revise waste legislation to incorporate new circular economy requirements, including legally binding waste/recycling targets  Develop a new National Waste Prevention Programme, and Regional Waste Management Plans that will guide our transition to a circular economy by EPA and Local Authorities  Support the development of eco-design and circular economy opportunities for Irish enterprises to reduce waste over the full lifecycle of products  Develop and implement a suite of measures to reduce the impact of single-use plastics   105  Maintain Government leadership in taking responsibility for own resource consumption, particularly single use plastics, energy, waste and water  Identify opportunities to strengthen the regulatory and enforcement frameworks and structures for the waste collection and management system, to maximise the collection of clean, segregated materials for reuse and/or recycling from all households and businesses,  Incentivise consumers to reduce, reuse and recycle  Regulate and incentivise producers of waste, particularly packaging, to ensure the prevention of waste and the use of recycled materials in packaging products  Scope a number of possible environmental levies, including a possible levy on single use plastics, as part of the review of the Environment Fund. Further detailed research would be required prior to the introduction of any new levy  Identify and commence delivery of measures to address the key regulatory barriers to the development of the bio economy, including exploring opportunities to establish for certain bio-wastes Bioeconomy In seeking to expand our bioeconomy, Ireland will undertake a number of policies and measures as set out under the national Plan including:  Ensure that there is coherence between all sectoral strategies which impact on the bioeconomy in Ireland  Establish a network comprised of representatives of commercial entities operating within the bioeconomy and relevant public bodies to inform the future development of the bioeconomy - this network may make additional recommendations to be followed up; (This could also include the sharing of best practice regarding applications for BBIJU, SC-2 and H2020 funding)  Encourage the translation of research into real world applications through promoting collaboration between research institutions (academia) and industry - through the use of pilots/demonstrations at the model demonstrator facilities (Lisheen site, the Marine Research Cluster in Connemara)  Assess the current legislative definition of waste and recommend whether a redesignation is necessary for residual waste flows to be successfully managed for use in the bioeconomy   106  Ensure greater sectoral coherence within the bioeconomy through the development of risk assessment and management protocols regarding the use of by-products which encourages the piloting of opportunities  Progress the leading value chain propositions identified in the Bio-Eire project by establishing the conditions required for their commercial viability and how these might be fulfilled  Examine how greater primary producer, public and consumer awareness of the bioeconomy and its products could be built up - through knowledge transfer, advisory, sustainable business models, public procurement, consumer awareness campaigns and product labelling initiatives etc.  Air Quality benefiting air quality and human health. The implementation of the policies and measures set out under this Plan and the Climate Action Plan will have significant benefits in relation to air quality. In particular, actions to reduce the use of fossil fuels, increase electrification of the national transportation fleet and further increase penetration of renewables in electricity generation will have knock on effects on the level of emissions of key pollutants across the state.  Biomethane The Climate Action Plan outlines the need to set a 2030 target for the level of energy to be supplied by indigenous biomethane injected into the gas grid and consider how necessary supports would be funded. The Marginal Abatement Cost Curve developed for the Climate Action Plan estimated that circa 1.6 TWh was considered part of the most cost-effective .  There are a number of limiting factors that need to be considered when setting a biomethane target  in particular biomethane is significantly more expensive than natural gas, impacting commercial viability, and therefore financial supports will be required. There are a number of funding options for biomethane that are under consideration with the most viable being:  An obligation in the transport sector through the Biofuels Obligation Scheme  An obligation in the heat sector (as set out in Article 23 of the recast Renewable Energy Directive)  An exchequer funded support   107 Public consultations commenced on the Biofuels Obligation Scheme (September 2019) and a potential heat sector obligation (October 2019). The potential for an Exchequer funded support would need to include consideration of the availability of funds, in particular the ability to fund within existing allocations provided under the National Development Plan. In the absence of certainty in relation to the mechanism by which biomethane will be supported, it is proposed to set an indicative target which will be reviewed in 2023 as part of the review process for the National Energy and Climate Plan. This review will take into account the development of supports and market development for biomethane and progress towards the indicative target. The indicative target for indigenous biomethane is therefore set at 1.6 TWh and will be reviewed in 2023. Hydrogen While it is probably too early to know with certainty the part hydrogen will play in a decarbonised integrated energy system, the production and use of hydrogen is expected to  As we move towards fully decarbonising our energy system, it is clear that there will be a move towards stronger sector coupling across the electricity, heating/cooling and transport sectors. With the development of large scale offshore renewable energy, the potential to generate renewable hydrogen at the scale required with an acceptable market price is becoming more realistic. Green hydrogen has the potential to play a key role in sectors which are difficult to decarbonise with existing technologies, such as heavy vehicles and maritime traffic. To decarbonise fully, it is vital to prioritise the development of green hydrogen. Blue hydrogen can only be acceptable where there is full capture and storage of the resulting carbon while grey hydrogen without carbon capture could not be considered to be acceptable in our transition to a fully decarbonised energy system. Developing a hydrogen economy will pose many challenges to the traditional energy sectors both on the demand-side and on the supply side. It is only by cooperating on a European scale that we can develop the necessary market rules, safety standards and cross border infrastructure to underpin the development of a sustainable and economically viable hydrogen sector. This can only be achieved in an efficient manner through the co-operation of national Governments, regulatory bodies, system operators and industry research.  Ireland has significant potential for production of electricity from renewable sources (such as onshore wind, offshore wind and solar). However, there are challenges in accommodating high levels of variable generation on the electricity system. The production of hydrogen could provide a variable demand that utilises renewable electricity that can help to decarbonise the natural gas grid and provide a zero emission energy source for use in difficult to decarbonise   108 sectors such as transport and industry. Ireland supports further exploration of hydrogen to support the integration of variable renewable electricity generation in particular for electrically isolated regions and in order to mitigate curtailment of wind energy. There is also an opportunity to incorporate hydrogen production from waste to energy plants that may find their electricity output curtailed during periods of low demand or high renewable penetration. Ireland has ambitious plans for renewable electricity with 70% of our electricity due to come from renewable sources by 2030. At times our electrical grid will not be able to use all this renewable generation so having the option to produce green hydrogen and having an integrated energy system will help enable Ireland fully utilise its renewable resources. This in turn will have the potential to reduce the overall cost of reaching decarbonisation targets. This hydrogen produced via underutilised renewable electricity could be stored in the local gas grid and used in the heating and transport sectors. This would provide benefits to all sectors and help the difficult to decarbonise areas of the economy such as industry and heavy goods vehicles. Blending with natural gas can create a demand for hydrogen and reduce emissions in grids across Europe. Current CCGTs (Combined Cycle Gas Turbines) could be reconfigured for H2 and potentially hydrogen turbines could be developed as backups for intermittent renewables. Carbon Capture & Storage  While reducing greenhouse gas emissions is a priority for climate action, the potential for capturing anthropogenic carbon dioxide is also mooted globally to prevent further carbon dioxide from entering the atmosphere and contributing to climate change. Technology is rapidly developing in this area and it is essential that Ireland remains abreast of relevant developments. Further to the commitment under the Climate Action Plan, a Steering Group was established in 2019 to examine the feasibility of the utilisation of CCS in Ireland and to develop policy in the area. This group is currently assessing a projected at feasibility stage promoted by Ervia, with a remit to report to the Dáil Standing Committee on Climate Action as appropriate. In terms of CCS and regional co-operation, Ervia has recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Equinor (Norway) and received letters of support for its successful PCI application from the Dutch Ministry and other CCS project developers; Athos (Netherlands), Gasunie(Netherlands), Sapling (Scotland), Northern Lights(Norway), UKCCS Research Group, Bellona (Norway) and Port Talbot(Wales). Supported by the Irish Government, the project received PCI status in October 2019 and has applied for Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) funding in Q2 2020.    109 The project, alongside European partners, was successfully granted European Horizon 2020 subject to the necessary approvals, to seek funding from the Horizon 2020 Geological Storage Pilot to progress studies into the potential for storing CO2 in the Kinsale Gas Field and another potential field in Europe.  Carbon Tax The Irish Government's Finance Act, 2010 introduced a carbon tax which is applied to mineral oils, natural gas and solid fuels supplied for combustion in Ireland. Since 1st May dioxide (CO2) emitted. The rate of tax on solid fuels from 1st May 2013 to 30th April 2014 f CO2 per tonne with effect from 1st May 2014. Budget 2020 in October 2019 announced a further be applied to other fuels from May 2 in 2020 all of which is to be ring-fenced to fund new climate action measures. Carbon tax imposition has been part of an environmental tax reform agenda in line with the polluter-pays principle; carbon tax has colle in revenue since it was introduced in 2010. Carbon tax is equivalent to d yield over Measures to increase carbon taxes will be part of an ongoing review into the medium-term.  Aviation The International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) has proposed a Carbon Offsetting Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA), in which aircraft operators will be required to purchase offsets, or emission units, for the growth in CO2 emissions covered by the scheme. CORSIA aims to address any annual increase in total CO2 emissions from international civil aviation above 2020 levels. Ireland supports the International Carbon Action Partnership (ICAP) CORSIA proposals covering international aviation emissions and sees this policy as a natural successor for EU ETS Aviation which will ensure a more level playing field for EU carriers currently operating in ETS and subject to costs associated with ETS compliance. National Digital Strategy  The development of a framework for a new National Digital Strategy is being led as a shared project by the Department of the Taoiseach, Department of Business, Enterprise and Innovation (DBEI), Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment (DCCAE), and the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform. The innovations,   110 efficiencies, growth and well-being benefits and opportunities from digitalisation require supporting forward-looking agile policy structures and open and collaborative approaches. Digital by its very nature is cross cutting and the new Strategy provides an opportunity to draw out and build upon linkages.  Better connectivity and skills leads to greater usability and inclusivity for all. This will again lead to less need for travelling to offices and other cities, thus further reducing the bon footprint. Digitalisation affects all aspects of economic and social life. It can help address policy challenges in a wide range of areas, including health, agriculture, tourism, public governance, tax, transport, education, and the environment. It also has significant implications for areas such as for regulating the sharing economy, labour market and training requirements due to automation and new forms of work, viability of physical retail and public services and implications for sustaining towns, taxation of digital services,  In deriving a framework, for the new National Digital Strategy, it will be cognisant of the interaction between policy, and supporting investments, and effective utilisation and related economic and societal impacts. The opportunities afforded by digital technologies will be harnessed, including our commitment to connect all homes in Ireland to high-speed broadband, as a powerful enabler of citizen and community engagement in the low-carbon transition. These technologies will also be a key driver of new economic and employment opportunities for all regions in Ireland, which will also have the potential to make a positive impact on our emissions by, for example, reduced commuting. Smart meters are one of the most significant energy infrastructure projects in a generation. They are a cornerstone of our plans to future-proof our energy sector - and indeed wider economy - for the coming decades. Smart meters will assist us decarbonise our society as they facilitate reduced energy consumption and additional energy efficiency. They will empower consumers by giving them more information and more choice around their energy consumption, and will facilitate the introduction of new energy products and services by suppliers. Smart meters will be a key enabler and are a vital element of plans to facilitate micro-generation and to enable consumers become energy suppliers in their own homes. Gender Equality  Ireland is committed to ensuring gender equality and has established a comprehensive framework of laws that provide for equal treatment of women and men. Our National Strategy for Women and Girls 2017-2020: Creating a Better Society for All commits to ensuring that a gender perspective is integrated into decision-making on a wide range of   111 areas of life, in the workplace, in education, in the family, on public and corporate boards, in sport and the arts. The Strategy sets out 139 actions across six high level-objectives. Included under the actions is a commitment to take gender equality issues into account in the implementation of the National Strategy to Combat Energy Poverty, which commits to ensuring that new energy policy measures are evidence-based and consider the distributional impacts of these policies. A further commitment is to address gender equality across SEAI programmes, including its research programmes.  A pilot initiative for Equality Budgeting was announced as part of Budget 2018. The paper Equality Budgeting: Proposed Next Steps in Ireland was also published with the Budget to provide more information. Six equality objectives were identified in the pilot, and performance measurements for them were then included in the Revised Estimates 2018 (published at the end of that year). Five of the objectives related to gender equality, whilst the sixth related to socio-economic equality. 'Equality Budgeting' involves providing greater information on the likely impact of budgetary measures across a range of areas such as income, health and education, and how outcomes differ across gender, age, ethnicity etc. Equality Budgeting helps policy-makers to better anticipate potential impacts in the budgetary process, thereby enhancing the Governme-making framework. iii. Policies and measures to achieve low emission mobility (including electrification of transport) Plan, Ireland plans to progressively electrify our mobility systems, moving away from polluting and carbon-intensive propulsion systems to new technologies, such as electric vehicles and introduction of electric and hybrid traction systems for public transcities and towns will enjoy a cleaner, quieter environment free of combustion engine-driven build on existing tax and financial incentives for low emissions vehicles, as well as stating a further ambition that all new cars and vans sold in Ireland from 2030 will be zero emission (or zero emissions-capable), in line with the National Policy Framework: Alternative Fuels Infrastructure for Transport in Ireland: 2017-2030. Low Emission Vehicles There are a range of measures in place to support the uptake of low emission vehicles. The supports for electric vehicles include:  Vehicle Registration Tax (VRT) relief on the purchase of newly registered electric vehicles   112  A purchase grant for electric vehicles  Accelerated Capital Allowances (ACAs) for electric vehicles and charging infrastructure.  A grant to support the installation of a home charger for purchasers of new and second-hand electric vehicles  A grant to support the use of electric vehicles in the taxi/hackney/limousine sector.  Relief from Benefit-in-Kind taxation for battery electric vehicles.  Low motor tax for battery electric vehicles  A discount on road tolls for electric vehicles  A public awareness campaign led by the SEAI There are also a number of measures in place to support the uptake of other low emission vehicles including:  VRT relief on the purchase of newly registered hybrid electric vehicles.  As part of the Causeway Project, Gas Network Ireland are currently rolling out 14 publicly accessible compressed natural gas (CNG) fuelling stations on the core TEN-T road network  Excise duty on compressed natural gas (CNG) is set at a significantly reduced level from the comparable levels that apply to petrol and diesel  Accelerated capital allowances for gas-propelled vehicles and refuelling equipment  The Low Emission Vehicle Taskforce is also considering further potential polices and measures to support the uptake of low emission vehicles. As regards electrification of encompassing the National Planning Framework and the National Development Plan, Project Ireland 2040, contains a series of relevant measures. These include delivering the key rail projects set out in the Transport Strategy for the Greater Dublin Area (GDA), including Metro Link, DART expansion and the Luas green line link to Metro Link. The Climate Action Plan sets a target of 936,000 electric vehicles (including both battery electric vehicles and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles) to be on the road in Ireland by 2030. There are a range of supports in place to incentivise the uptake of electric vehicles including:  Purchase grants of up to      113  Benefit-in-kind tax relief for battery electric vehicles     Accelerated Capital Allowances for businesses   Low rate of annual motor tax   A discount on tolls  In addition, to support the development of charging infrastructure, the following supports are in place:  e point (which will be expanded in 2020 to include shared parking in apartment blocks)  Accelerated Capital Allowances for businesses to support investment in charging infrastructure  alling on-street chargers  existing public charging network and rolling out 50 fast chargers (50kW) and 90 superfast chargers (150kw) across the country The Climate Action Plan sets out a number of actions to further support the uptake of electric vehicles including to:  Introduce legislation to ban the sale of new fossil fuel cars from 2030  Develop a roadmap on the optimum mix of regulatory, taxation and subsidy policies to drive significant ramp-up in passenger EVs and electric van sales from very early in the next decade  Develop the EV charging network necessary to support the growth of electric vehicles and set a target for the supply of infrastructure to stay sufficiently ahead of demand  Develop and implement planning rules and guidelines across residential and non-residential parking locations for electric vehicle charging infrastructure  Ensure our regulatory regime for buildings requires the installation of electric vehicle charging infrastructure   114 The Climate Action Plan and recommendations from the Low Emission Vehicle Taskforce also recognise the need to incentivise the growth of low emission vehicles in addition to electric vehicles. In particular supports for the growth of CNG, LNG and hydrogen vehicles  particularly as the heavy duty vehicles  are being considered.  The Biofuels Obligation Scheme as detailed above ensures the continued increase in use of sustainable biofuels in the transport sector.  Land Use Planning  Ireland has a relatively low population density with 70 persons per square kilometre compared to 117.7 for the EU-28. Such settlement patterns give rise to dispersed journeys for which public transport provision is not always feasible. The net result is a higher dependence on private car use and longer journeys compared with more densely populated urban settlements. In addition, Ireland is experiencing population growth with an increasing tendency towards dispersed, low-density developments. The largest increases in population over the past twenty years have been in Fingal, Cork (outside Cork City Council area), Kildare, Meath, Laois and Galway County (outside Galway City Council area) accounting for approximately 45% of the additional population growth since 1996. These extensive catchments and dispersed land-use development patterns have resulted in greater car dependency, longer commutes, a high demand for road infrastructure and difficulties in supplying adequate public transport provision.  Transport policies aimed at reducing travel demand and travel distances can only be delivered if there are effective spatial policies in place. The location of schools, jobs, shops, local services and other land uses relative to the location of residential developments are critical determinants of the need to travel, the distances to be travelled and the modes of transport chosen. Additionally, the provision of sustainable transport alternatives can only be effective if matched with complementary development patterns which support and facilitate their use.  Future investment in new public facilities must take account of the need for access without reliance on the car. In the Greater Dublin Area, the National Transport Authority (NTA) published the Transport Strategy for the Greater Dublin Area 2016-2035 to ensure that spatial planning and transport planning are appropriately aligned. While it is not currently a statutory requirement for other cities to develop a similar transport strategy the NTA has assisted several local authorities across Ireland in preparing plans to strengthen the levels of integration between spatial planning and transport planning across the country. The National Planning Framework: Ireland 2040 y remit for transport planning in the GDA to the other cities. Outside the GDA, the NTA has   115 assisted the local authorities in Cork and Galway to develop the Galway Transport Strategy and the draft Cork Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy. Work is underway on the Limerick Shannon Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy and will start soon on the Waterford Metropolitan Area Transport Strategy.  In line with the energy efficiency first principle, public transport use and modal shift should be encouraged through efficient planning. The implementation of the National Planning Framework will be central in setting the context for future national planning objectives and will ensure that all future land use and transport planning are fully aligned to successfully influence how people travel. Land use policy is a key determinant in transport investment decisions at both the strategic and local level. The Framework has set National Strategic Outcomes for Sustainable Mobility and the Transition to a Low Carbon Climate and Climate Resilient Society. The Government has identified the transition to electric vehicles (EVs) and other low emission vehicles (LEVs) as a critical factor in delivering these outcomes, through:  The provision of adequate charging infrastructure: The Govwhere feasible, EVs are charged primarily where they are parked overnight and that supplementary charging opportunities are made available at suitable locations and destinations where vehicle parking is provided and along key travel routes  Local Authority Development Plans: The cost of retrofitting charging infrastructure to existing homes, businesses, car parks and other locations can be a barrier to its installation and therefore to the transition to EVs. Consequently, it is vital that Local Authorities should ensure that provision is made for EV charging within their Development Plans, particularly at the point of development and construction; and   The provision of adequate charging LEV infrastructure: The provision of adequate fuelling infrastructure nationally for other LEVs (such as compressed natural gas, liquefied natural gas and hydrogen) should be facilitated, where appropriate, to support the uptake of these vehicles and their rollout nationally A Working Group set up under the LEV Taskforce considered the role that planning policy and legislation, building regulations and state leadership may play in facilitating charging and refuelling infrastructure deployment. Planning Authorities play an important role in future proofing the need for LEV recharging/refuelling infrastructure through the planning process. Currently, in Ireland all Planning Authorities are required to have a Development Plan for their functional area which must support the promotion of measures to reduce greenhouse gases and address necessity of climate change adaptation.  To integrate LEVs further into Development Plans the LEV Taskforce recommended that the Guidelines be updated to include:   116 References to evolving government LEV policies to support the roll out of LEV infrastructure through Planning Authority functional areas; make certain adequate numbers of EV charging points are installed and provision is made (e.g. through the installation of ducting) for future installation of EV charging points at all appropriate locations where parking is provided for passenger vehicles (including homes, businesses, on street and car parks); safeguard that ; and ensure locations that cater for traditional fuelling of vehicles (i.e. filling stations) provide charging for EVs and, where applicable and in line with government policy, fuelling for other LEVs.  The Taskforce also recommended that guidance be issued to planning authorities to ensure a consistent and future proofed approach to the rollout of EV charging infrastructure through planning decisions. Improving the Efficiency of Public Transport The Public Sector Energy Efficiency Strategy highlights the role that the public sector fleet can play in piloting, facilitating and accelerating market uptake of new, energy efficient technologies and alternative fuels. The efficiency of the public transport fleet is incrementally being improved through the replacement of older vehicles with newer models and prioritising/accelerating the roll-out of more energy efficient vehicles.  A. Electrification of Commuter Urban Rails The DART (Dublin Area Rapid Transit) system is an electrified commuter rail network serving the east coast of Dublin, including its city centre. The DART currently serves 31 stations and provided over 35 million passenger journeys in 2018. The National Development Plan  to upcoming public transport projects over the period to 2027.  is earmarked for investment in the DART Expansion Programme which will create a full metropolitan area DART network for Dublin and will transition current diesel commuter lines to electricity from the city centre to Drogheda, Co. Louth, to Celbridge/Hazelhatch and Maynooth, Co. Kildare. This will also involve a new interchange station with bus, LUAS (light rail) and planned MetroLink networks. This is the part of the national rail network that carries over 75% of total rail passengers each year.  -electric trains, which will enable the enlargement of the rail fleet by approximately some 300 new rail carriages. In addition, Climate Action Fund to design new hybrid power-packs for intercity railcars to reduce diesel use and greenhouse gas emissions. Following the proof of concept in one three car train, the hybrid power-packs   117 could potentially be implemented across the wider fleet. These major rail projects will help supplement the range of viable low carbon alternatives to private passenger car travel and positively impact on our sectoral emissions and energy profile.  B. Cessation of Diesel Urban Bus Purchasing  In the urban bus fleet, a clear trajectory towards low-emission has firmly been established. In the short term, the National Development Plan committed Ireland to no longer purchase diesel-only buses for the urban public bus fleet from July 2019. In the short-term, a decision was made by the National Transport Authority (NTA), which is responsible for procurement of vehicles in the public service obligation (PSO) fleets, to purchase hybrid-electric buses in the short term. The Climate Action Plan also contains actions to accelerate the decarbonisation of the public bus fleet with the objective to only have low-emitting buses in the urban PSO bus fleet by 2035. In order to inform future purchasing decisions, the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport launched a low emission bus trial in December 2018. The trial assessed full electric, diesel-electric hybrids and compressed natural gas buses and key findings from this trial have been published on the DTTAS website. The medium and longer term approach to the -carbon buses will be informed by a range of matters, including the outcome of the low-emission bus trials, as well as the Sustainable Mobility Policy review and complementary information from trials and demonstrations of lower-emitting buses undertaken in other jurisdictions across Europe. The recast Clean Vehicles Directive also contains new stringent sub-targets for zero-emissions buses to promote cleaner and energy-efficient public transport vehicles. It is expected that this Directive will result, in the longer term, in acceleration and wider deployment of clean and energy efficient buses. C. Electrification of New Public Transport Projects Further investment from the National Development Plan  to public transp to 2021 for light rail projects in Dublin, including the Green Line Capacity Enhancement Project which, in addition to the recently completed Luas Cross City project, will add capacity to the light rail network in Dublin through additional and longer trams. In addition, funding is also being allocated to progress a new metro system, MetroLink, will provide Dublin with a high-capacity, high-frequency cross-city rail corridor, serving critical destinations including Dublin Airport and Dublin City University. MetroLink will provide faster   118 reliable journey times to and from these key destinations while offering interchange with other rail, DART Expansion, light rail and bus services. D. Demand Management Study in Major Cities  The Climate Action Plan sets out a number of actions and targets including some which should encourage fewer diesel and petrol cars on Irish roads, particularly in cities. Fewer fossil fuelled cars would have a number of effects in Irish cities, including improved air quality, less congestion and lower levels of CO2 emissions. In order to encourage the transition away from fossil fuels onto more sustainable forms of transport, Action 81 of the Plan calls for: [The development of] a regulatory framework on low emission zones and parking pricing policies, and provide local authorities with the power to restrict access to certain parts of a city or a town to zero-emission vehicles. Examine the role of demand management measures in Irish cities, including low emission zones and parking pricing policies. Implementing this commitment, the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport (DTTAS) published a request for tenders to carry out a Demand Management Study, the purpose of which is to understand what measures are available to help address the impacts of growing transport levels in our major cities (Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Galway and Waterford). The study will look at a range of factors and ultimately should recommend options on how we might better manage travel demand in urban areas. A number of cities and countries have introduced various suites of demand management measures to limit traffic and encourage alternative transport modes, especially in urban areas due primarily to congestion and air quality concerns. These measures include: parking policies; low emission zones; tolling; and teleworking practices.  Implementation of the required and most appropriate measures in each case will have regard to existing powers of local authorities, including those reserved to elected members. DTTAS will work closely with the Department of Housing, Planning and Local Government if additional legislation or local authority functions are identified as providing pathways for addressing these problems. E. Electric Vehicle Deployment Roadmap Passenger cars account for over half of all land transport emissions in Ireland; therefore a transition to low and zero emission cars is one of the necessary changes if Ireland is to substantially reduce its transport emissions and energy use. Accordingly, electric vehicles (EVs) are a prominent mitigation in the Climate Action Plan, which sets targets of 180,000 EVs on Irish roads by 2025, and 936,000 EVs by 2030. With over 14,600 EVs in Ireland at the end of October 2019, these targets are very challenging and they are indicative of the   119 scale of the transformation that is needed across all sectors if Ireland is to reduce national emissions and reach its legally binding emission ceiling in future years. It is widely expected that, over the coming years, the combination of:  Improvements in technology  Reductions in vehicle purchase prices  Increasing driving ranges and model availabilities; and  Government incentives and new investment in the recharging network will maintain the current positive policy environment under which we have seen EV sales rise steeply over the past year, albeit from a low base. To date, the Irish Government, supported by the Low Emission Vehicle Taskforce, has worked to ensure that conditions and policies are in place to support citizens in making greener vehicle choices. Several Government Departments have responsibility for incentives to encourage a move towards EVs; this concerted work across several Departments will continue in order to accelerate the current trajectory of EV sales. Action 79 of the Climate Action Plan commits DTTAS to develop a roadmap on the optimum mix of regulatory, taxation and subsidy policies to drive significant ramp-up in passenger EVs and electric van sales from very early in the next decade. The relevant Departments will be convened by the end of February 2020 to pursue this aim.  Public Transport Investment The National Development Plan (NDP) sets out the major investments planned over the next 10 years for Public Transport. It provides for full Exchequer fu allocated for public capital investment over the period 20 has been set aside for investment in Sustainable Mobility. Over the period leading up to 2027, the NDP will deliver the new MetroLink, the DART Expansion Programme, and BusConnects in the Greater Dublin Area and Cork and Galway.  MetroLink will run between Swords and Charlemont, connecting key destinations including Dublin Airport and the City Centre along the 19km route. It will provide Dublin with a high capacity, high-frequency cross-city rail corridor and will have the capacity for 30 trains per hour in each direction. It will cater for up to 20,000 passengers per direction per hour and carry up to 50 million passengers per annum.  The DART Expansion programme is a series of projects that will create a full metropolitan area DART network for Dublin with electrification of the Northern, Kildare and Maynooth lines. It includes buying additional fleet for the DART network and measures such as re-  120 signalling, junction and station changes and new stations to provide interchange with bus, LUAS and Metro networks.  BusConnects Dublin involves a blend of infrastructure and system improvement measures alongside a reconfigured bus network. The initiative aims to transform the current bus system in the Dublin Region. This programme is part of a wider BusConnects programme for cities. BusConnects will deliver a better and more efficient bus network; faster journeys for public transport users; improved passenger information and ticketing technology and transition to a lower emission bus fleet The NDP also includes maintenance of the current Public Transport network, fleet renewal, maintaining and upgrading heavy rail infrastructure, the appraisal and design of extending the Luas network for when and where it is needed, investment in cycling and walking facilities, accessibility upgrades, and the roll out of next generation ticketing systems.  Modal Shift/Share Alongside technological developments, behavioural change amongst motorists will be critical in reducing emissions in the transport sector. Many mitigation measures are dependent on modal shift or a change in the fuel and/or technology currently employed to meet travel demands. It is critical to develop a better understanding of the important role that behavioural economics and psychology play in decision making to facilitate a greater uptake of energy efficient or sustainable travel options. Normalising new technologies and addressing consumer concerns will be required to accelerate the mitigating impact that alternative fuels and technologies can potentially have. "A New Transport Policy for Ireland 2009-2020" sets out key modal share targets for achievement by 2020. These targets are aimed at reducing work-related commuting by car as a modal share of 65% to 45% and accommodating car drivers on other modes of transport such as walking, cycling, public transport and car sharing to the extent that commuting by these modes would rise to 55% by 2020 (or through other measures such as e-working).  Figures released from the Central Statistics Office (CSO) in the CSO National Travel Survey of 2016 indicate that the use of private cars nationally for work commuting purposes has dropped from 67% in 2011 to 66% in 2016. This has occurred against a background in the last few years of strong economic recovery, growth in the numbers of people at work, and consequent increases in travel demand and numbers of people commuting.   121 In the Greater Dublin Area there has been a much greater and a more significant modal shift. The Annual Canal Cordon Report recently published by Dublin City Council and the National Transport Authority - which provides data on trends in mode share of vehicles and people crossing the Canal Cordon in Dublin between 7am and 10am - indicates that a strong modal shift has been occurring in the Dublin City Centre area. It shows that 70% of all inbound trips crossing the canal cordon were made by a sustainable mode which includes cycling, walking, taxi and other public transport. Over the last 12 years, the share for sustainable modes has grown by 9 percentage points, and since 2010 there has continually been year-on-year growth.  In order to continue to build on this momentum and to encourage further modal shift  is being directly allocated to develop cycling and walking infrastructure in the Greater Dublin Area, Galway, Limerick, Cork and Waterford over the period 2018-2021. A further  over this same period for investment in Sustainable Urban Transport projects, and these will include projects that will provide either direct or indirect improvements for urban cycling. Investment of more than investment package that will finance new and expanded bus routes, greatly improve bus access, and also includes the commencement of construction of core bus routes that include segregated cycle lanes and pedestrian footpath all which will greatly assist in encouraging  including Green Schools, Cycle Right and Smarter Travel Workplace and Campus programmes aimed at encouraging a modal shift.  to ensure services are sustainable into the future and are meeting the needs of a modern economyare now at an advanced stage for launching very shortly. This policy review has been drawing together data and information from many sources, including monitoring trends in modal shift in order to inform future policies in the context of encouraging further modal shift from the private car to sustainable public transport modes.  iv. Where applicable, national policies, timelines and measures planned to phase out energy subsidies, in particular for fossil fuels Fossil Fuel Subsidies The Climate Action Plan commits to phasing out coal-fired electricity generation by 2025 and peat-fired electricity generation by 2028. There are three electricity generating plants in the Midlands that use peat as the primary fuel, totalling 350MW of electricity. Two of these plants will close by the end of 2020 when current planning permission expires. The Plan also   122 includes an action to model the impacts, both in terms of the economy and in terms of emissions, of removing fossil fuel subsidies.  The Public Service Obligation (PSO) levy has been in place since 2001. It is the overall support mechanism for peat generation, for certain conventional generation constructed for security of supply purposes, and for the development of renewable electricity. The levy compensates electricity suppliers for the additional costs they incur by purchasing electricity generated by these producers.  The Commission for Regulation of Utilities (CRU) determines the PSO levy which is a charge on all electricity customers without exception. Regulations made under the Electricity Regulation Act 1999, as amended, provide the legal basis for the levy. The levy applies to all electricity customers and is reviewed annually. The PSO levy supports for peat generation will cease at the end of 2019. One of the actions in the Climate Action Plan is that CRU is to carry out an assessment of the impact of the current structure of electricity bill charges, including PSO and standing charges on self consumers and other consumers, in 2020. Indirect Carbon Costs ETS installations in Ireland are currently not permitted to recoup indirect carbon costs associated with electricity and gas expenditures that already bear carbon tax incidence. This discretionary aspect of EU ETS is subject to review by the Department of Finance. Just Transition The Climate Action Plan recognises that the level of change envisaged to decarbonise seen to be fair and that every group is seen to be making an appropriate level of effort. This will be essential to maintaining the high level of political and civic consensus which has been Action.  A Just Transition Review Group will be established within the National Economic and Social Council (NESC) as part of its working group structures. Through this Group, NESC will review the ongoing transition and identify specific transition needs among cohorts of workers, enterprises, communities and specific groups of people. The Just Transition Review Group will collaborate with a wide range of stakeholders and will interact closely with both the National Dialogue on Climate Action and the Sustainable Development Goals Stakeholder Forum which operate under the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment.    123 The NESC was also tasked with publishing a periodic review and strategic advice on the Just Transition. This will include an examination of the range of national and international funding opportunities, and how these could be used to underpin the work of this Group and the priorities identified. The first periodic review and strategic advice will be published by the end of 2020 and is intended to be a key input to the formulation and adoption by Government of a five year Just Transition Strategy. The Government recognises that addressing just transition is also about empowering communities and households to prepare for and to realise the opportunities that will be afforded by a low carbon transition. The Government is committed to delivering a just transition to those who are negatively impacted by climate action. This includes those workers affected from the move away from fossil fuels. Ireland will:  Improve the resilience of communities and households by providing information and building capacity, taking account of the distinctive needs of urban and rural communities   Provide improved training and support initiatives for community and voluntary stakeholders to support community, local and national low carbon action;   Work to refine how our energy schemes target those most in need, to make them as efficient as possible   Address the impact of proposals for carbon pricing on low income groups and those facing greater challenges in reducing their emissions   Enhancing the capacity of our education and training system to support a just transition, including more explicit focus on the skills needed in the low-carbon transition. This includes supports for workers in vulnerable sectors and returnees to the labour market through a focus on career advice, up-skilling and re-training, as well as the development of new skills and expertise in our education and training system Bord na Móna has been harvesting peat for electricity generation in the Midlands of Ireland for over 70 years. There are three electricity generating plants in the Midlands that use peat as the primary fuel, totalling 350MW of electricity. One plant at Edenderry is currently co-firing with peat and biomass. While it was planned to co-fire with peat and biomass and eventually move to 100% biomass by 2027 in all three plants due to several issues, including planning approvals, supply of indigenous biomass, compliance with EU and national objectives, and economic viability (carbon price, fuel costs, sustainability, etc.), two of these plants will close by the end of 2020 when current planning permission expires. The third   124 plant is likely to seek planning to move to 100% biomass when its current planning approval expires in 2023, thus maintaining some fuel diversity and possibly an indigenous fuel source if sufficient biomass can be produced locally. Bord na Móna has been an integral part of the commercial and social development of the Midlands since 1947, creating significant employment in the region. Several supports are being put in place in the Midlands region in the transition away from peat harvesting.  Budget 2020 announced specific measures to respond to the fallout from the cessation of peat harvesting by Bord na Móna:  the appointment of a Just Transition Commissioner  reskilling workers and assist local communities and businesses in the Midlands to adjust to the low carbon transition   which will restore bogs to their natural habitat and become sinks that absorb carbon  targeted at the Midlands These measures will be targeted at the Midlands and will support, alternative employment, retraining and reskilling workers and assist local communities and businesses in the Midlands to adjust to the low carbon transition. There will be further consultation with the structures already in place in the Midlands, including the Midlands Transition Team, on the application of the funding.  The bog restoration and rehabilitation fund will support the National Parks and Wildlife Service to restore to their natural habitat 1,800 hectares of bog. This restoration will return these bogs to carbon sinks once more, which, over the next 5 years, will result in 28 million tonnes of carbon being stored. 70 jobs will be created in year one, rising to 100 as the programme develops.  The delivery of a new model to group housing upgrades together is set out in the Climate Action Plan. This will be targeted at the Midlands and will support an estimated 400 jobs directly and indirectly, as well as significantly upgrading the social stock in the region during 2020.  A Just Transition Commissioner is to be appointed to engage with all relevant stakeholders in the Midlands, including Bord na Móna, the Midland Regional Transition Team, as well as   125 the National Economic and Social Council. This appointment will be part of the on Plan, which is currently being led by the Department of An Taoiseach.  Ireland has also been included as members of the Platform for Coal Regions in Transition. Membership of the Platform enables the Midlands region to avail of the support of a dedicated Country Team of experts to assist with the development of strategies and projects for the region, focusing in particular on the employment challenges faced by the workers affected by efforts to decarbonise our economy. The ending of peat harvesting in the midlands will have significant implications for employment in the region and the Government has been successful in having the midlands included in the Platform for Coal and Other Carbon-Intensive Regions in Transition, which supports regions affected by climate policy. Membership of the Platform enables the Midlands region to avail of the support of a dedicated Country Team of experts to assist with the development of strategies and projects for the region, focusing in particular on the employment challenges faced by the workers affected by efforts to decarbonise our economy.