  10  1.  1.1. Executive Summary i. Political, economic, environmental, and social context of the plan Climate change is one of the most profound challenges we face globally. Tackling this challenge will require substantial reductions in carbon emissions across all sectors of the economy, alongside a rapid transition to a net zero-carbon energy system. Ireland is committed to becoming one of the leaders in responding to climate disruption. In terms of energy policy our goal is to facilitate an energy transition to a low carbon energy system, which provides secure supplies of competitive energy to citizens. Neither energy nor climate policy can operate in a vacuum. Ireland has recognised the close interactions between the development and implementation of climate and energy policy, both in a European and International context. Energy and climate policy have operated under a single Department, the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment (DCCAE), since 2016.  The Irish economy has recovered well from the economic crisis in 2008. However, the improved economic outlook in recent years has seen emissions grow once more, highlighting that Ireland has failed to completely break the link between emissions and growing prosperity. Ensuring the complete decoupling of energy consumption from economic and population growth will be vital in successfully decarbonising our economy.  The island of Ireland is shared between Ireland and Northern Ireland. The total land area of Ireland is 70,273 square kilometres. It is bounded in the west and north-west by the Atlantic Ocean, in the south by the Celtic Sea and in the east by the Irish Sea. Our climate consists of mild winters and cool summers, with a high degree of humidity throughout the year.  Ireland is a parliamentary democracy; there are 26 county councils, three city councils, and targets, particularly for climate change and energy efficiency.  Ireland had a population of 4.75 million in 2016, of which slightly more than 1.3 million resided in Dublin city and county. This was an increase of 3.8% for the total population and 5.7% for Dublin city and county above the 2011 level. Other large urban centres include Cork on the southern coast, and Limerick and Galway on the western coast. Ireland is a sparsely populated country, and has the highest percentage of population living in rural areas in the European Union.   11 ii. Strategy relating to the five dimensions of the Energy Union Ireland is committed to achieving an energy resilient union with a forward looking climate policy. This Plan builds on previous national strategies and sets out in detail our objectives regarding the five energy dimensions together with our planned policies and measures to ensure that we achieve those objectives. In June 2019, the government agreed to support the adoption of a net zero target by 2050 at EU level, and to pursue a trajectory of emissions reduction nationally which is in line with reaching net zero in Ireland by 2050.  Decarbonisation  GHG Emissions and Removals  Building on the policy framework of the National Mitigation Plan (NMP) and Project Ireland 2040, the Government published its Climate Action Plan  in June 2019. The Climate Action Plan identifies how Ireland will achieve its 2030 targets for greenhouse gas emissions in a manner consistent with a trajectory to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. The Non-ETS (Emissions Trading System) sector accounts for 74% of total EU emissions in Ireland. The ESR enshrines a greenhouse gas emissions reduction target for Ireland of 30% by 2030 relative to 2005 levels. The Climate Action Plan sets out over 180 actions, together with hundreds of sub-actions, that need to be taken and embraces every relevant sector: electricity, industry, enterprise, housing, heating, transport, agriculture, waste, and the public sector.  Reflecting the central priority of climate change in our political and administrative systems into the future, Ireland is establishing new governance arrangements including carbon-proofing our policies, establishment of carbon budgets, a strengthened Climate Change Advisory Council (CCAC) and greater accountability to the Parliament. We have introduced measures to ensure that citizens become engaged and mobilised to take climate action, while ensuring that the necessary societal and economic transition that we have to make is fair, both in Ireland and globally.  Decarbonisation  Renewable Energy Ireland has excellent renewable energy (RE) resources, which will be a critical and growing component of Irish energy supply to 2020 and beyond. Indigenous renewable energy already plays a vital role in our domestic fuel mix. It also increases sustainability through the dependence on imported fuels. Ireland has established an ambitious and challenging target of increasing reliance on renewables from 30% to 70% by 2030. As regards flexibility, the Delivering a Secure Sustainable Electricity System (DS3) Programme will remain key to achieving a more flexible Irish energy system with the objective of raising the already recording breaking levels of intermittent generation penetration in the Single Electricity   12 Market (SEM) from the current 65% to 75renewable penetration. Ireland is committed to delivering an early and complete phase-out of coal and peat fired electricity generation.  Energy Efficiency  The Climate Action Plan defines a roadmap to a net zero carbon energy systems objective by 2050. In terms of energy efficiency a number of actions across various sectors will made significant progress towards our energy efficiency targets. Further improving energy efficiency is central to our transition to a low carbon economy. Using less energy in a more flexible way is the most cost effective and accessible way we can tackle climate disruption. Ireland is committed to applying the energy efficiency first principle to all proposals, decisions and investments flowing from this Plan. This Plan commits to a wide range of ambitious and far-reaching policies and measures aimed at improving our energy efficiency.  Energy Security  acilitate the enhancement of resilience of the gas and electricity networks. Ireland is committed to maintaining the security of our energy system in the most cost-effective manner. Ireland is cognisant of the risks posed by the impacts of climate change to our energy security. The policies and measures set out under this plan, both in terms of mitigation and adaptation, serve to offset those risks. The impact of the wide range of policies and measures aimed at increasing energy efficiency will contribute considerably to ensuring security of our energy system. A review of the The focus of the review is the period to 2030 in the context of ensuring a sustainable pathway to 2050. Given the increasing dependence of electricity production on natural gas and the increasing dependence on imports from the UK, it is important that close co-operation on security of supply continues with EU Member States and the UK. A policy statement on Transition to a Low Carbon Economy was published on 17th December 2019. This sets out energy mix, as we transition to a low carbon economy. The Policy confirms that existing applications and authorisations at 23 September 2019 can progress through the standard lifecycle stages for exploration, extraction and production of natural gas and/or oil but that future licensing will be for natural gas exploration only. Internal Energy Market    13 form an interlinked policy-aligned system of measures which underpin and facilitate greater renewable electricity penetration in Ireland and progressive decarbonisation of its wholesale electricity sector, and also ensure efficiency and security of electricity supply. national objective relating to the EU internal energy market is, and has been over the long term, to continue to deepen tregulation, with the EU internal energy market (IEM), building on well-known ongoing plans, programmes and actions in this regard. Ireland is committed to supporting customers participation in the energy system and enabling them to sell excess electricity they have -western edge of mainland Europe presents obvious challenges to interconnection, not least in the area of costs, yet may also highlight the desirability of interconnection, particularly in the context of security and diversification of electricity supply. The national and regulatory policy combined have now created a model environment for the proposal of additional interconnection as appropriate to assist in meeting our national targets. Research, Innovation and Competitiveness  technologies must be developed and deployed in the coming years. There is a need to ensure that the best scientific evidence and advice is available to underpin policy and support the policies and measures set out under this Plan. The update to national research priorities for 2018 to 2023 reflects the increased urgency of the need to address climate change, with a new research priority theme focusing on Energy, Climate Action and Sustainability, and two priority areas concentrating on decarbonising and sustainable living and also smart and sustainable food production and processing. To enhance the resilience levels and avoid any narrowing of the tax base.      14 iii. Overview table with key objectives, policies and measures of the plan Dimension Key Objectives Key Policies and Measures * Decarbonisation - GHG emissions and removals Reduce emissions from sectors outside the EU's Emissions Trading System by 30% (relative to 2005 levels) by 2030.    A range of policies and measures promoting RE and EE (set out further below).  Launch targeted calls under Climate Action Fund  Trajectory of carbon pricing to create behavioural change and avoid locking in carbon intensive technologies.  Establish a system of 5-year carbon budgets and sectoral targets.  Carbon proofing all government decisions and major investments.  Establish a Just Transition Review Group  A new Climate Action Act which will include a 2050 target.  Eliminate non-recyclable plastic and impose higher fees on the production of materials which are difficult to recycle.  Implement measures to ban single-use plastic plates, cutlery, straws, balloon sticks and cotton buds.  Expanding the network of cycling paths and "Park and Ride" facilities.  Making growth less transport intensive through better planning, remote working and modal shift  Specified range of improvements in farming practice in line with recommendations from Teagasc.  Promoting the increased use of domestic harvested wood in longer lived products, which will enhance the storage of carbon in these products and act as a substitute for materials with a higher carbon intensity.   Deliver expansion of forestry planting and soil management to ensure that carbon abatement from land-use is delivered in 2021-30 and in the years beyond.  Support diversification within Agriculture and land use to develop sustainable and circular value chains and business models for lower carbon intensity farming.  Reduce the vulnerability of the State to the negative effects of climate change and to avail of any positive impacts that may occur  Mainstream biodiversity across the decision making process in the State. Decarbonisation - Renewable energy Ireland has established an objective of achieving a 34% share of renewable energy in energy consumption by 2030.  Increase electricity generated from renewable sources to 70%.  At least 3.5 GW of offshore renewable energy.  Up to 1.5 GW of grid scale solar energy. Onshore wind capacity of up to 8.2 GW.  Increase electricity generated from renewable sources to 70%, underpinned by the Renewable Electricity Support Scheme (RESS).  At least 3.5 GW of offshore renewable energy of mainly offshore wind, the development of up to 1.5 GW of grid scale solar energy, an increase in onshore wind capacity of up to 8.2 GW.  Streamline consenting and connection arrangements.  Phase-out of coal and peat-fired electricity generation.  Introduce a support scheme for micro-generation.  Facilitate community participation in renewable generation under the Renewable Electricity Support Scheme.   15   Provide funding supports for new technologies onshore and offshore.  Ensure that 15% of electricity demand is met by renewable sources contracted under Corporate Purchase Power Agreements (PPAs).  electricity meters will be replaced in every house by 2024 under the Smart Metering Programme.   Support the ocean energy research, development and demonstration pathway for emerging marine technologies and associated test infrastructure.  Accelerate the penetration of electric vehicles (EVs) so that 936,000 will be on the road by 2030, underpinned by policy tools such as vehicle and fuel taxation measures, and a strong carbon tax trajectory.  Increase the renewable biofuel content of motor fuels underpinned by the biofuels obligation scheme.  Introduce legislation to ban the sale of new fossil fuel cars from 2030.  No diesel-only purchases for urban public buses from July 2019 onwards.  Develop the CNG fuelling network to support the uptake of CNG vehicles. Energy efficiency Contribute towards the EU wide target of achieving at least 32.5% improvement in energy efficiency by 2030.   Saving obligations in accordance with Article 7 of the Energy Efficiency Directive (EED).  Saving obligations in accordance with the requirements of Article 5 of the EED.   A range of policies and measures listed under the other dimensions will go towards achievement of our energy efficiency objective.   All new dwellings will be built to NZEB standard from 1 November 2019.  Setting stricter requirements for new buildings and substantial refurbishments.  Building a supply chain and a model for aggregation where home retrofits are grouped together.  500,000 homes retrofitted to a B2 Building Energy Rating or cost optimal equivalent by 2030.  Public sector buildings to have a B Building Energy Rating (BER) by 2030.  One third of commercial (including mixed use) buildings to have a B BER (or carbon equivalent gains) by 2030.  600,000 heat pumps installed over the period 2021-2030.  Effectively ban the installation of oil boilers from 2022 and the installation of gas boilers from 2025 in all new dwellings through the introduction of new regulatory standards for home heating systems. Progressively phase out oil and gas boilers in existing dwellings through a combination of incentives, information and regulatory measures.  Ensure a suitable policy framework is in place to support district heating.  A 50% energy efficiency target for the Public Sector by 2030.  The Targeted Agricultural Modernisation Scheme (TAMS) II Scheme provides grant aid for a number of investments specifically aimed at improving energy efficiency in the farming sector.  Scale-up and improve the Sustainable Energy Communities and Better Energy Communities (BEC) programme and enlist a wider range of organisations to anchor its collective approach.   Develop the necessary supply chain, including working with Regional Skills Fora to train skilled   16 workers. Energy security Ireland is committed to maintaining the security of our energy system in the most cost effective manner.    A review of the security of energy supply of carried out. The focus of the review is the period to 2030 in the context of ensuring a sustainable pathway to 2050.  Support efforts to increase indigenous renewable sources in the energy mix, including wind, solar and bioenergy.  Facilitate infrastructure projects, including private sector commercial projects, which enhance .  In light of uncertainties related to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, work closely with our EU partners to maintain existing good regional co-operation between Ireland and the United Kingdom in relation to Emergency Preparedness and Response.  The National Cyber Security Council (NCSC) having due regard to the Commission recommendation is working with providers of critical national infrastructure to improve the overall level of cybersecurity in the energy sector. Internal energy market   Continue to deepen the electricity market, and its regulation, with the EU internal energy market (IEM), building on well-known ongoing plans, programmes and actions in this regard.  Develop further interconnection of 70% renewable electricity.  retail electricity market, with the EU internal energy market.  Continatural gas market in line with European energy policy.   Maintain and develop the successful all island wholesale Single Electricity Market, or SEM, to include ensuring that all aspects of the new I-SEM market, the capacity mechanism and other planned/signalled reforms are fully implemented, over the next few years.  Implement the requirements of the Third Energy package Network Codes and Guidelines and the Electricity Regulation and Electricity Directive of the Clean Energy Package in the Irish electricity market.  capacity mechanism with the obligations in the CEP State Aid approval.  Design and implement the next phase of the DS3 System Services programme to provide enhanced system flexibility to accommodate increased renewables on the electricity system.  participation in the energy system and enabling them to sell excess electricity they have produced back to the grid.  Ireland is developing the regulatory and market regime necessary to allow renewable gas be injected into the natural gas grid and used in the heat and transport sectors.  with closely monitoring electricity and gas retail markets to ensure that competition continues to   17 develop and that the interests of electricity and gas customers are protected.  Alleviate the burden of energy poverty on the most vulnerable in society through actions focused on improving the efficiency of homes. Research, innovation and competitiveness Ensure that the best scientific evidence and advice is available to underpin Government policy and support the objectives, policies and   Given ambition regarding reduction of greenhouse gas emissions new technologies must be developed and deployed in the coming years.    Broaden the enterprise and export base by strengthening support for indigenous business to scale and to internationalise.   Increase investment in knowledge-based capital (e.g. intellectual property, software, organisational changes, training and design) is also vital.  The update to national research priorities for 2018 to 2023 reflects the increased urgency of the need to address climate change, with a new research priority theme focusing on Energy, Climate Action and Sustainability, and two priority areas concentrating on decarbonising and sustainable living and also smart and sustainable food production and processing.  Strengthen delivery of public funding for basic and objectives and open up new economic opportunities  Increase in a stepwise fashion public funding for the SEAI National Energy Research Development & Demonstration Funding Programme  Consideration of the role of hydrogen in the including the potential production of renewable hydrogen from excess renewable electricity.  examine the feasibility of the utilisation of CCS in Ireland and to develop policy in the area. * This list is not exhaustive  see Chapter 3 and voluntary templates for further detail Table 1: Key objectives, policies and measures of the plan 1.2. Overview of Current Policy Situation i. National and Union energy system and policy context of the national plan Ireland is firmly committed to the concept of the Energy Union and its ultimate goal of achieving an energy-resilient union with a forward-looking climate policy. As a peripheral, less-well-transition to a low carbon future, just as the Single Market led to an economic transition for many Member States. , National Mitigation Plan 2017, and Energy White Paper 2015, align fully with the principles set out in the Energy Union strategy, and provide the national framework to transform Ireland into a low carbon society and economy.  The EU agreed a comprehensive update of its energy policy framework to facilitate the transition away from fossil fuels towards cleAgreement commitments for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The Clean energy for all   18 Europeans package marks a significant step towards the implementation of the energy union strategy.  The changes will bring considerable benefits from a consumer perspective, from an environmental perspective, and from an economic perspective. It also underlines EU long-term strategy of achieving carbon neutrality by 2050. Ireland is committed to the Energy Union and to achieving a net zero carbon energy system objective for Irish society.  Ireland published its All of Government Climate Action Plan in June 2019. The Plan clearly identifies the nature and scale of the challenge facing Ireland. It outlines the current state of play across key sectors including Energy, Transport, Built Environment, Industry and Agriculture and charts a course towards ambitious decarbonisation targets for each of the sectors. Reflecting the central priority climate change will have in our political and administrative systems into the future, the Plan also sets out governance arrangements including carbon-proofing our policies, establishment of carbon budgets, a strengthened Climate Change Advisory Council and greater accountability to the Oireachtas. The Plan recognises that Ireland must fundamentally step up its commitments to tackle climate disruption and puts in place a decarbonisation pathway to 2030 consistent with the adoption of a net zero target in Ireland by 2050. The Climate Action Plan builds on the policy framework, measures and actions set out in the National Mitigation Plan and Project Ireland 2040Energy White Paper (2015) these policy documents present a long-term strategic vision intended to guide the direction of Irish climate and energy policy from now until 2030 and beyond.  The Climate Action Plan sets out a wide range of actions and measures which Ireland needs to implement to meet our EU 2030 targets and to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. The climate actions identified will be implemented by 13 Government Departments and 40 agencies under the remit of those Departments. Delivering with such an integrated set of actions and policies will require a deep level of collaboration across Government. Some key governance actions outlined in the Plan include the establishment of a Climate Action Delivery Board within the Department of An Taoiseach to hold designated bodies to account. In support of the Delivery Board, a new Climate Action Unit has also been established to monitor and drive implementation and assist with the preparation of a progress report each quarter. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development encourages countries to develop national responses to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and incorporate them into   19 planning and policy. The Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment has lead responsibility for promoting and overseeing national implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its 17 SDGs. This is a whole-of-government initiative where all Ministers retain responsibility for implementing the individual SDGs relating to their functions. The Climate Action Plan 2019 has been incorporated into this Plan SDGs. The first National Implementation Plan was published in early 2018 and sets out arrangements for interdepartmental coordination, stakeholder engagement and periodic progress reporting at national and global levels. ii. Current energy and climate policies and measures relating to the five dimensions of the Energy Union See section 1.1 for a summary of the key policies and measures relating to the five dimensions of the Energy Union. A more detailed description can be found at section 3. A voluntary spreadsheet setting out a detailed list of policies and measures under the five dimensions will also be submitted to the European Commission.  iii. Key issues of cross-border relevance will not be clear until such time as the final exit agreement emerges. In the meantime, the Irish authorities have been clear on energy issues The impacmarket development and integration is not yet known. Existing energy and trading arrangements between Ireland and the UK, ensuring the continuity of mutually dependent energy arrangements and maintaining the long-standing history of beneficial co-operation in this sphere are very important to both jurisdictions on an enduring basis. During negotiations on the Withdrawal Agreement, the Irish and UK governments and the European Commission consistently outlined their commitment to maintaining the existence of the all-island Single Electricity Market when the UK leaves the EU.  Since October 2018, the Irish wholesale electricity market has been directly linked with other EU markets and the IEM through EU Single Day-ahead coupling. This coupling has resulted in a marked increase in the efficiency of the allocation of capacity and trade across the two interconnectors between the SEM with Great Britain (GB). of the UK exit is to maintain security of supply. In the event of a no deal UK exit from the EU, uncertainty will remain as to the consequences of Brexit for electricity trade across interconnectors between the all-island   20 SEM and Great Britain. This uncertainty primarily relates to the removal of the GB market from pan-EU Single Day-ahead Coupling in a no deal exit from the EU. This development would result in less efficient electricity trade across interconnectors between the SEM and Great Britain, which would subsequently take place through the intra-day timeframe in which these two markets will remain coupled following Brexit. With the risk to interconnector trade posed by the UK decision to leave the EU, an important objective of Ireland will be to retain h energy regulator and Transmission System Operator (TSO) have committed to work to mitigate any possible future loss of efficiency in interconnector flows between the SEM and GB in so far as possible. Given the increasing dependence of electricity production on natural gas and the increasing dependence on imports from the UK, it is important that close co-operation on security of supply continues with EU Member States and the UK. This includes continued regional co-operation with the UK on emergency preparedness and response for electricity and gas security of supply. Additionally, it will be important that Ireland retains access to EU funding for energy infrastructure projects to improve IrelanOnce the UK leaves the EU, Ireland will have no electricity interconnection with any Member State. By providing a direct electricity link with mainland Europe, the Celtic Interconnector with France, -Brexit.  Ireland is currently reliant on the UK for approximately 60% of its petroleum product imports and for about 25% of its crude oil imports. policy statement on Petroleum Economy component of our energy mix, as we transition to a low carbon economy. The continuing adherence to the established European standards mechanisms and the close proximity of UK refineries to Ireland should mean a continuation of this trade, post the UK withdrawal from the EU. g is currently physically stored in the UK. Whether this may continue to be counted towards our EU stockholding obligation may ultimately depend on the final trade agreement between the EU and the UK. Ireland is committed to regional energy co-operation and is a member of the North Seas Energy Co-operation (NSEC), the British-Irish Council (BIC) and is a signatory to the EU Islands forum. These fora are discussed in more detail at section 1.4. position on interconnection is outlined in the 2018 National Policy Statement on Electricity Interconnection. It emphasises the important role of interconnection in the transition to a low   21 carbon energy future. It reflects the increasing importance of interconnection to national and EU policy. Further detail is set out under section 3.  The UK exit from the EU currently represents the foremost downside economic risk for Competitiveness Competitiveness Ireland & the UK 2017 report, the potential imminent structural shift in the etitiveness across a range of policy areas  including trade, investment, skills, and sector specific competitiveness impacts. Ireland retains strong linkages to key international fora in the energy and climate research sectors (e.g. Horizon 2020, SET Plan, UNFCCC, IEA etc.). It is expected that these key strategic engagements will assist Ireland in effectively responding to the uncertainties associated with  and to consider any opportunities which he EU will determine the range and scale of opportunity and challenge for the Irish research, innovation and competitiveness sectors.  iv. Administrative structure of implementing national energy and climate policies The Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment (DCCAE) is the lead climate, and environment policy. Delivering and implementing the wide range of policies and measures necessary to achieve our energy and climate goals will require a deep level of collaboration across Government, local authorities and agencies.  The Climate Action Plan provides for a detailed governance structure to ensure full and proper implementation of the plan and achievement of our climate goals. Included under the governance structures set out in the Climate Action Plan are the establishment of a Climate Action Delivery Board, the carbon proofing of Government policies, the establishment of a Climate Action Council, the adoption of a new carbon budget system with clear sectoral targets to be formally set out under new legislation. These governance structures are expanded on further below and will be employed to ensure implementation of the policies set out under this plan.    22 1.3. Consultations and Involvement of National and Union Entities and Their Outcome i. Involvement of the national parliament Programme for a Partnership Government, published in May 2016, committed the Government to the establishment of a  to consider some of the most Report and Recommendations on the issue of climate change was published on 18 April 2018. On 11 July 2018 a new parliamentary Committee, the Joint Committee on Climate Action, Recommendations. The terms of reference establishing this Joint Committee instructed the Committee to consider how the Assembly recommendations might inform the development of Ire-Climate Change: A Cross- Party Consensus for Action-April this year. The report makes over  ate Action Plan published in June 2019 which in turn significantly informed the final NECP. Ireland became the second country in the world to declare a climate and biodiversity emergency in May 2019. The NECP will be subject to final approval by Government prior to formal submission to the European Commission.  ii. Involvement of local and regional authorities al communities and can act to demonstrate public sector leadership on climate action in their areas as well as key mobilisers of change. In 2018 four Climate Action Regional Offices (CAROs) were established to assist the Local Authority sector in building capacity to engage effectively on climate change. These groups and structures were consulted in the development of the Climate Action Plan and NECP.  A Climate Action Charter for Local Authorities will be developed and support offered in developing their activities under the Charter. Under the National Adaptation Framework (NAF) the 31 local authorities in Ireland are required to develop their own adaptation strategies in line with guidelines to be developed for the sector. Work on the development of strategies is undertaken by individual local authorities with support from the CARO in that region.    23 iii. Consultations of stakeholders, including the social partners, and engagement of civil society and the general public The ministry met with NGOs and the environmental pillar of social partnership in relation to the development and finalisation of the NECP. The ministry also presented to the Climate Change Advisory Council on the draft NECP. The Climate Change Advisory Council was established under the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Act 2015 and was signed into law on the 18th January 2016. It is an independent advisory body tasked with assessing and advising on how Ireland can achieve the transition to a low carbon, climate resilient and environmentally sustainable economy. The Council, with the support of its Secretariat, conducts evidence-based analysis on how best to respond to the impact of climate change and provides timely advice on the most effective policies to assist with  transition to a low carbon and climate resilient economy. The Government has established a National Dialogue on Climate Action. The National Dialogue on Climate Action is a Government initiative led by the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment with the support of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). It involves structures, information flows and events to facilitate discussion and deliberation on responses to climate change challenges, as well as enabling and empowering action at local, regional and national levels. The National Dialogue provides an opportunity to create awareness, engagement and motivation to act (locally, regionally and nationally) in relation to the challenges presented by climate change.  An initial public consultation on the NECP was held in late 2018. This consultation explained the NECP template and process and asked a series of open questions. These were considered as the draft NECP was being compiled. A further public consultation was held in January and February 2019 on the detail of the draft NECP. Those public consultation responses together with the measures set out in the Oireachtas Committee Report, the All of Government Climate Action Plan, further analytical work by Departments and Agencies and the iterative process with the Commission all inform this final version of the NECP. The responses to the third, final consultation will inform the final Plan. A summary report of the public consultations held during 2018 and 2019 will be submitted to the European Commission together with the final plan.  The draft NECP was not subject to a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) pursuant to the SEA Directive. The draft NECP set out the key objectives, policies and measures which Ireland intends to implement in order to contribute to the achievement of Irish and European goals related to climate change. The draft NECP consolidated all of the various measures which had been proposed across government. One of the main national documents included   24 in the NECP is the National Mitigation Plan (NMP). The NMP was prepared within the framework of the Climate Action and Low Carbon Development Act 2015 and was the subject of a statutory consultation, a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), and Appropriate Assessment (AA). The National Mitigation Plan remains in place as the statutory plan under the 2015 Act.  The Climate Action Plan gives further effect to, rather than replaces, the National Mitigation Plan. The Climate Action Plan outlines a coherent set of abatement measures across the five sectors that contribute most to Irelands greenhouse gas emissions: Agriculture, Transport, Electricity, Built Environment, and Industry. These measures are incorporated into the final NECP. The Climate Action Plan, published in June 2019, was not subject to SEA. In those circumstances, the ministry commenced a screening process on the NECP to assess whether an SEA or AA is required, taking into account the updates required to the NECP to incorporate the Climate Action Plan commitments. It has been assessed that an SEA and AA should be carried out. That work will commence as soon as the plan has received Government approval.  iv. Consultations of other Member States Ireland consulted on its National Energy and Climate Plan in the area of planned offshore wind deployment until 2030 and related grid planning aspects with the other North Seas countries within the framework of the North Seas Energy Co-operation.  Officials from DCCAE discuss their formulation of a new energy strategy to 2030, their input to the UK NECP and the preparation and Officials also travelled to Paris and Berlin  v. Iterative process with the Commission Pursuant to the requirements of the Governance Regulation, Ireland submitted its draft NECP in December 2018. The submission of the draft plan represented the first step of the iterative process between the Commission and Ireland for the purpose of the finalisation of the plan and its subsequent implementation. Ireland actively engaged in the iterative process in a variety of ways with the Commission throughout 2019. Ireland attended and participated at expert working groups on the NECP and presented to the Commission and other Member States a number of times in respect of the draft plan and the process of putting it together. Ireland also engaged in bilateral discussions with the Commission to ensure robustness and completeness in the final plan. The Commission issued its Recommendations to Ireland on   25 the draft NECP in June 2018 and Ireland has worked closely with the Commission to ensure that due account is taken of the Recommendations in this final plan.  1.4. Regional Co-operation in Preparing the Plan i. Elements subject to joint or coordinated planning with other Member States Ireland is part of the wider North Seas region, which has a large offshore renewable energy potential. The European Commission has estimated that offshore wind from the North Seas can cover up to 12 per cent of the electric power consumption in the EU by 2030. Offshore wind generation and grid infrastructure projects may have cross-border effects on energy prices, security of supply and the environment, including availability of marine space as well as the pace of innovation. The North Seas countries therefore have great benefits to gain from co-operation with each other. The North Seas Energy Co-operation (NSEC) is a voluntary market-oriented, regional co-operation initiative established in 2016, which seeks to create synergies, to reduce incompatibilities between national policies and to share knowledge on international best practices and foster joint strategies where possible and mutually beneficial. The aim is to coordinate and facilitate further cost-effective deployment of offshore renewable energy, in particular wind, ensuring a sustainable, secure and affordable energy supply in the North Seas countries through increased and better coordinated offshore wind deployment as well as potential joint projects or cluster projects. The NSEC focuses on working together with the perspective of developing further integration and increased efficiency of wholesale electricity markets in the longer term, while contributing to a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, in average wholesale electricity price spreads and enhancing overall security of supply in the region.  The NESC consists of 10 countries with participation from the European Commission: Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, France, Germany, UK, Ireland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark. ii. Explanation of how regional co-operation is considered in the plan North Seas As regards to preparing this plan, Ireland made use of the NSEC, in which experts in the support groups shared information and experiences on specific aspects, for example on barriers and best practices of national offshore wind development and in particular on aggregation of national renewable energy trajectories for offshore wind until 2030 and market integration.    26 Ireland furthermore consulted on its National Energy and Climate Plan in the area of planned offshore wind deployment until 2030 and related grid planning aspects with the other North Seas countries.  The support groups under the co-operation focus on the following subjects:   Support group 1: Maritime Spatial Planning and environmental assessment  Support group 2: Development and regulation of offshore grids and other offshore infrastructure  Support group 3: Support framework and finance for offshore wind projects  Support group 4: Standards, technical rules and regulations in the offshore wind sector Within the NESC Ireland contributes to the work on establishing common environmental impact assessment methodology. In order to reach our energy and climate targets within the EU, there is a need to better understand the possible ecological limits of large scale wind development in the North Seas. Further work is needed on maritime spatial planning and environmental assessment to be able to utilise the potential of the North Seas. To increase knowledge and support the deployment of offshore wind in the North Seas, the North Seas countries will continue to cooperate closely on maritime spatial planning, environmental research, cumulative impact assessment of wind farms between responsible authorities for energy, maritime spatial planning and environment.  Offshore Grids and Other Offshore Infrastructure The NSEC serves as a platform to jointly work on concepts for potential joint wind offshore projects and for coordinated electricity infrastructure including transmission infrastructure.  Ireland works together with the other North Seas Energy Co-operation countries on the possibilities for concrete co-operation projects. Besides joint offshore wind projects that would be connected to and supported by several Member States, this includes the work on possible 'hybrid' solutions that would use cross-border solutions for connecting offshore wind farms to the grid and seek synergies with interconnection capacity between countries, and on the corresponding market arrangements.  Ireland is therefore contributing to the development of policies for co-operation on hybrid projects and identifying and addressing possible legal, regulatory and commercial barriers. By coordinating on increased interconnection among the countries in the NSEC, an increasing amount of excess production of energy could flow across borders to meet demand in a well-functioning internal energy market.    27 The NSEC has identified a list of potential areas and projects in the region, where joint projects could be particularly beneficial. These include: (1) IJmuiden Ver offshore wind farm to UK, (2) CGS IJmuiden Ver  Norfolk, (3) COBRA Cable, (4) DE offshore wind farm connected to NL and (5) North Seas Wind Power Hub.  The NSEC is working on developing concrete concepts for the implementation of selected projects from the above list. The NSEC will continue to work on the actions plans for the specific hybrid projects which can also be taken further at a national and regional level. Furthermore, the co-operation will continue to work as a forum to reflect on how to deal with the uncertainties about the regulatory treatment of hybrid projects at EU and national level and as a forum to discuss options for addressing these issues.  Support Framework and Finance of Offshore Wind Projects As regards to measures, Ireland benefits from the NSEC in several ways. The work in the NSEC provides a platform for exchange of best practice regarding the design of support schemes and to develop and work on new concepts tackling new challenges concerning support for offshore wind as well as to develop possible options for future joint offshore wind projects. Ireland works in the NSEC to coordinate the timing of tenders, to exchange best practices on the design for offshore wind support schemes and to identify, where possible, common principles as well as possible options for alignment of support.  As regards to coordination of tenders, Ireland regularly shares information regarding its national tender schedule with the other NSEC countries with the aim of identifying possible overlaps in time and enabling the most continuous tender pipeline across the North Seas region to ensure that tender processes maximize competition and deliver most value for money to consumers. Ireland is ready to take into account, amongst other criteria and where possible, this overview of tender schedules in its future tender planning to avoid unnecessary bottlenecks and to provide a steady capacity pipeline to involved stakeholders without stop and go cycles. Ireland shares and discusses in the NSEC the estimated national offshore renewable trajectory, information on its national offshore deployment plans and best practices in the design of offshore wind tenders.  At the Ministerial meeting in Esbjerg on the 20th of June 2019, North Seas countries agreed to work together to achieve an indicative aggregated installed offshore wind capacity of Member States of the NSEC of at least 70 GW by 2030 based on national planning. The   28 indicative contribution of Ireland to this aggregate capacity in 2030 is at least 3.5 GW (see also section 2.1.2). In order to reflect the dynamics of offshore wind deployment in the region, this aggregate planned capacity of at least 70 GW for 2030 can be translated into an overall trajectory with indicative milestones for the region of approximately 25 GW in 2020 and 54 GW in 2025. In the NSEC, Ireland also contributes to the work of analysing and developing options for further mobilisation of investment capital for joint projects, for instance through EU funds such as European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) and Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) as well as institutional investors. Such future joint projects could be cross-border projects for renewable energy in accordance with the CEF proposal. Harmonisation of Rules, Regulation and Technical Standards The North Seas Energy Co-operation is working on aligning standards and technical requirements that could contribute to further reducing costs of offshore wind deployment. The focus is on aligning rules, regulation and technical standards within five identified areas. These include: (1) Aviation, marking and lights, (2) Health and safety, (3) Certification of regulatory requirements, (4) Park layout and site investigation and (5) Approaches to research. The NSEC works to develop proposals and recommendations for implementation in close co-operation with industry. The aim of those recommendations is to achieve cost reductions whilst at the same time be achievable. The co-operation will continue to work on aligning standards and technical requirements as well as exchange of best practices to reduce unnecessary regulation and costs for the industry. Clean Energy for EU Islands The Clean Energy for EU islands initiative provides a long-term framework to help islands generate their own sustainable, low-cost energy. This will result in:  Reduced energy costs and greatly increased production of renewable energy and the construction of energy storage facilities and demand response systems, using the latest technologies  better energy security for islands, which will be less reliant on imports  improved air quality, lower greenhouse gas emissions, and less impact on islands' natural environments  the creation of new jobs and business opportunities, boosting islands' economic self-sufficiency.   29 The initiative was launched in May 2017 in Malta, when the European Commission and 14 EU countries (Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Malta, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden) signed a Political Declaration.  Clean energy for EU islands secretariatobjective of the Clean Energy for EU Islands Secretariat is to help as many European islands as possible embark on and advance their clean energy transition in a way that includes the whole island and its stakeholders. The initiative provides a forum for exchange of best practice which has assisted Ireland in developing this plan and enhancing co-operation with other Member States.  Further elements of regional co-operation under the five energy dimensions, including detail on the British-Irish Council and interconnection co-operation, together with how regional co-operation is considered in the plan is set out under Chapter 3.