3.4. Dimension Internal Energy Market  3.4.1. Electricity Infrastructure i. Policies and measures to achieve the targeted level of interconnectivity as set out in point (d) of Article 4 -western edge of mainland Europe presents obvious challenges to interconnection, not least in the area of costs, yet may also highlight the desirability of interconnection, particularly in the context of security and diversification of   140 electricity supply. Details on Irelands national policy on Electricity Interconnection are set out in section 3.1.2(i). Ireland continues to support key interconnection project proposals through the EU PCI process, primarily North-South, Greenlink and Celtic. In August 2016, the CRU commenced the process of devising a Regulatory Policy for esting submissions detailing what matters should be considered in developing a regulatory policy for electricity interconnectors.  In October 2017 CRU wrote to EirGrid directing them to process grid connection applications from Electricity Interconnector promoters with PCI status. In that note CRU reaffirmed its commitment to progress Electricity Interconnector applications.  CRU published a consultation paper on the Greenlink application and its planned approach to evaluating the application in June 2018. CRU then published a consultation on the evidence base details (regulatory and specifics) in July 2018. The next stage of the regulatory policy framework was the publication by CRU in September 2018 of its decision paper on Assessment Criteria for Interconnector applications. Subsequently in October 2018 CRU published its initial decision on Greenlink application for Cap and Floor treatment. This stage was the public interest test and has been passed. Next it plans to consult on a proposed cap and floor regime and hopes to issue its final decision in 2020.  evaluation of the two interconnector applications  Greenlink and Celtic. Regarding the Celtic interconnector, the regulators in Ireland and France reached a joint decision in 2019 allocated to Ireland and 35% to France, subject to a substantial grant from CEF. The national and regulatory policy combined have now created a model environment for the proposal of additional interconnection as appropriate to assist in meeting our national targets. ii. Regional co-operation in this area North Seas Energy Co-operation As stated above The North Seas Energy Co-operation (NSEC) aims to facilitate the further cost-effective deployment of offshore renewable energy with the aim of ensuring a sustainable, secure and affordable energy supply in the North Seas countries, thereby also facilitating further interconnection, further integration and increased efficiency of wholesale electricity markets in the longer term.    141 Ireland works together with the other North Seas Energy Co-operation countries on the possibilities for concrete co-operation projects. Besides joint offshore wind projects that would be connected to and supported by several Member States, this includes the work on possible 'hybrid' solutions that would use a grid connection cable for evacuating offshore wind as well as interconnection capacity between countries, and on the corresponding market arrangements.  A regional study is being developed looking at the possibilities for co-operation on hybrid projects and identifying and addressing possible legal, regulatory and commercial barriers. Further work is planned on synergies between offshore wind and offshore oil and gas installations. By coordinating on increased interconnection among the countries in the North Seas Energy Co-operation, an increasing amount of excess production of energy could flow across borders in a well-functioning internal energy market. The NSEC aims to reduce the costs of renewable energy and grid development and remove barriers to investment, thereby contributing to achieving climate goals and the EU-wide renewable energy 2030 target. Moreover, it strengthens security of supply and supports the EU's long term competitiveness and energy market integration.  The Irish-Scottish Links on Energy Study Ireland was a partner in the Irish-Scottish Links on Energy Study (ISLES), a major initiative designed to enable the development of interconnected grid networks to enhance the integration of marine renewable energy between Scotland, Northern Ireland and Ireland. DCCAE is the lead administrative partner for ISLES in collaboration with the Scottish Government and the Department of the Economy in Northern Ireland.  The objective of the study was to investigate the feasibility of an offshore interconnected grid, and identify steps to reducing barriers to delivering this grid. The first phase of this project - ISLES I - was completed between 2010 and 2012 and produced a feasibility study. The second phase - ISLES II - was completed in June 2015 and comprised three research streams:   Spatial Plan and Sustainability Appraisal   Network Regulation and Market Alignment Study, and   Business Plan Northern Ireland, the Border Region of Ireland and Western Scotland with the partners providing the match-funding.      142 British Irish Council  Energy Work Sector  Ireland is a central contributor to the British-Irish Council (BIC) Energy Working Group. This Work Sector was established in 2009 and was previously divided into two sub-groups, considering Marine Energy resources and Electricity Grid issues. In 2016 these two sub-groups came together in one group with a joint focus on marine and grid issues. The role of the Energy Work Sector is to provide a forum for discussion and collaborative working on cross-border issues in relation to electricity infrastructure. The Work Sector has been an important contributor to the ISLES project and in 2017 Ireland led discussions of the Work Sector in the area of electricity interconnection. June 2018 saw Scotland host an energy Ministerial where Ministers signed off on an ambitious programme of work focused on the grid and marine areas but also extended to include some other topics for co-operation such as community energy. In June 2019 a further Ministerial took place in tandem with a Heads of Administration Summit in Manchester.  General Co-operation  In addition to the above fora, Ireland cooperates regionally with both the UK, including Northern Ireland, and France in respect of existing, planned and potential interconnection. Ongoing efficient trade in electricity coupled with strong regional co-operation with the UK will continue to be important in terms of security, consumers and decarbonisation.   underwater connection. Once built, its 700 megawatts capacity will power 450,000 households, and help Ireland to switch to 70% renewable energy as set out in the electricity interconnection with any Member State of the European Union. By providing a direct electricity link with mainland Europe, Ireland will be connected to the Eco-operation between the two countries will be imperative over the coming decade.  iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds Programme for Northern Ireland, the Border Region of Ireland and Western Scotland with the partners providing the match-funding. Both the Celtic and Greenlink interconnector have received CEF funding for studies. including  On 2 October 2019, the European Commission   143 0.7m grant from the CEF for the Celtic Interconnector  energy policy objectives. The CRU assess electricity interconnection applications on the basis of a set of technical, economic and regulatory criteria. In particular, the impact of each project both in terms of its socio-economic benefits as well as in terms of costs under a range of different scenarios and sensitivities. In carrying out our evaluation, CRU has due regard for the long-term interest of final consumers, in particular in ensuring that the impact on national tariffs does not represent a disproportionate burden for the Irish consumer. 3.4.2. Energy Transmission Infrastructure i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.4.2, including, where applicable, specific measures to enable the delivery of Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) and other key infrastructure projects Government Policy Statement on the Strategic Importance of Transmission and Other Energy Infrastructure In July 2012, the government produced a policy statement on the Strategic Importance of Transmission and other Energy Infrastructure. This statement reaffirmed the need for the development and renewal of energy networks to meet economic and social goals.  It stated that the planning process provides the necessary framework for ensuring that all necessary standards are met and that comprehensive statutory and non-statutory consultation is built into the process. It confirmed that  Compliance with Trans-European Energy Infrastructure Regulation  Ireland is compliant with EU Regulation 347/2013 which promotes the development of trans-European energy infrastructure. Under Article 8 of the regulation, DCCAE has designated petent authority responsible for facilitating and coordinating the permit granting process for projects of common interest.  An Bord Pleanála was designated Competent Authority for the purposes of Article 8.3(c) of Regulation 347/2013. An Bord Pleanála is carrying out this role in accordance with the requirements of Regulation 347/2013 for a streamlined permit granting procedure. The competent authority, in consultation with other consenting authorities, sets the time limits in accordance with Article 10 of the Regulation on which individual decisions shall be issued for a project of common interest.   144 EU Regulation 347/2013 lays down rules for the timely development and trans-European energy projects in order to achieve the energy policy objectives of the EU. The Energy Infrastructure Regulation contains guidelines for the identification of projects known as Projects of Common Interest (PCI). The PCI designation carries certain conditions and entitlements, including more streamlined planning and regulatory processes at Member State level. The regulation facilitates the timely implementation of projects of common interest by streamlining, coordinating more closely and accelerating permit granting processes and by enhancing public participation. TSO Public Engagement In discharging its duties as operator and developer of the national transmission grid, EirGrid engages with communities and citizens on an ongoing basis.  In December 2014 it completed a comprehensive review of its existing consultation process and has been working since then to implement the commitments arising from the review. EirGrid subsequently produced a new project development and consultation roadmap. This is in the form of a six-step process with the public central to each step. Following an extensive review of its public consultation process EirGrid updated its process for developing the grid. Since October 2017, all projects follow a six-step process. The six steps are illustrated in the figure below. The process is detailed in the publication Have Your Say.   Figure 1: EirGrid's public consultation process The six-step process seeks to ensure projects are developed in a consistent and transparent way with opportunities for stakeholder engagement and consultation throughout the process. As part of the process EirGrid use multi-criteria decision-making. This involves assessing the relative performance of options across agreed criteria. Decisions are then based on a detailed analysis of stakeholder feedback and on economic, technical, social, environmental and deliverability criteria.    145 ii. Regional co-operation in this area EirGrid and Gas Networks Ireland work very closely with all European Transmission System Operators (TSOs) through ENTSO-E and ENTSO-G. Significant areas of work include the TYNDP and Network Codes. A joint TYNDP is produced by ENTSO-E and ENTSO-G. Network Codes are a common set of rules being adopted by the European Union which will enable electricity and gas network operators, generators, suppliers and consumers to operate more effectively in the pan-European electricity and gas market. The harmonisation of national rules will promote the efficient use of cross-border interconnection between countries and will provide a more secure and reliable systems with an increased level of renewable generation. iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds The majority of projects are financed through customers that use the transmission systems in Ireland. Both the Celtic and Greenlink interconnector have received CEF funding for studies. Greenlink has received a granthree grant awards including two for  On 2 October 2019, the European Commission announced the grant from the CEF for the Celtic Interconnector between Ireland and F. 3.4.3. Market Integration i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.4.3 Some of the regulatory policies and measures related to the national objective for market integration in section 2.4 are already provided for in existing plans and programmes, comprising the new market design, the associated new capacity mechanism and the DS3 programme. Further regulatory measures in the SEM over the coming years are set to be implemented to ensure compliance with relevant EU energy acquis requirements, and in accordance with regulatory and system operator work programmes and timelines. The requirements flow from the EU relevant network codes and guidelines, the Electricity Market Regulation in the Clean Energy Package and the requirements of the SEM capacity mechanism State Aid approval. Further details on the main elements of these policies and measures are contained in this following section. Given that the I-SEM project was being developed as the Clean Energy Package was being negotiated and the depth and broad scale of reforms implemented in the new market design,   146 in many respects the SEM is now already largely compliant with the principles for the design and operation of electricity markets outlined in the CEP recast electricity market regulation. This CRM introduced in 2017 is State Aid approved and is also similarly aligned in many respects with the regulation. It should also be noted that given the short time since the launch of both the new market and the associated capacity mechanism, a sufficiently long period after implementation in electricity market terms would be required to assess fully and properly the efficacy of the I-SEM reforms and new market design. The new market launched on 1st October 2018 and included the establishment of new Day-Ahead, Intra-Day and Balancing Markets, with an ex ante clearing price compared to the previous ex-post gross mandatory pool system, and a new obligation on participants to take responsibility for imbalances. Under the I-SEM design new centralised Day-Ahead Market (DAM), Intra-Day Market (IDM) and Balancing Market (BM) are the exclusive routes for physical contract nomination and physical scheduling of generation in the SEM. Contracts struck in the forwards timeframe do not confer a right to physically schedule generation, demand or cross-zonal capacity in the all-island market. Forward contracts do not offset imbalance exposures caused by variations in metered volumes and traded positions from the DAM, IDM and BM.  In addition to the above, imbalances in the SEM are now traded out on public market places rather than vertically integrated participants being allowed to balance within their own portfolio outside of the market. The cost to the TSOs in relation to the procurement of energy needed to keep overall supply and demand in balance is reflected in the imbalance prices. Market participants are required to provide bids and offers to provide this energy to the TSOs in the Balancing Mechanism (BM), up to the technical capability of the market participant to respond to dispatch instructions. The new market design is delivering a range of benefits to the Irish consumers and the energy system as a whole. For instance, more competitive trading arrangements is facilitating better use of existing infrastructure assets in the electricity system, as highlighted by the significant increase in the efficiency of interconnector flows between the SEM and Great Britain (GB) since October 2018.  Through the ability to trade closer to real time, the new market is also facilitating the continued growth of renewable generation and decarbonisation of Irish power generation. It is also important to note the non-discriminatory nature of participation in the new market and its capacity mechanism, which has led to a marked increase in demand side participation and battery storage in the SEM. This development will facilitate swifter decarbonisation of   147 power generation, thereby helping Ireland to meet its ambitious 70% renewables target contained in the Climate Action Plan published in June 2019. A New Capacity Mechanism in the SEM The new design for SEM included the introduction of a new competitive capacity remuneration mechanism (CRM) as an integral feature of the market, which was State Aid approved by the European Commission in November 2017. Consistent with the thrust of EU acquis, including Article 22 of the CEP recast Electricity Market Renergy sector terms) established to address existing resource adequacy issues. Considering the level of projected demand growth in Ireland, the transition to ever higher levels of variable renewables, and the need to manage the transition from an aging fleet of conventional fossil fuel units, the SEM capacity mechanism will continue to play a central role in securing the level of investment required in the coming years. Given the importance of the CRM as a measure, the position of Ireland is that planned future amendments to the Environmental and Energy State Aid Guidelines, should not resort to a and the Guidelines must continue to account for the different structural circumstances across individual Member States of the EU. The Guidelines must remain sufficiently flexible both to ensure generation adequacy and security of supply and to facilitate the achievement of the ambitious decarbonisation objectives on the island of Ireland in a cost effective and efficient manner. CRM, in conjunction with the energy and ancillary services markets, provides a necessary revenue stream to ensure adequate levels of future investment including in flexible generation, such as demand response and battery storage.  Unlike the pre-ISEM administratively determined capacity payment mechanism, the value of capacity in the market under the new CRM is now determined through competitive auction. The CRM includes penalties for generators that receive reliability option payments after a successful bid but are then not available to produce when required at times of system stress. A number of successful auctions have already taken place under the new CRM, which in addition to securing necessary future capacity have facilitated future investment in the flexible generation, demand side participation and battery storage required to complement  The recast Electricity Regulation requires Member States with capacity mechanisms to carry out certain tasks, depending inter alia on whether the Member State intends to have, or already has, in place a capacity mechanism and, if the latter, on the timing of its capacity   148 auctions. Such Member States are required to develop and publish an implementation plan with timelines for adopting measures to eliminate any identified regulatory distortions or market failures that cause or contribute to the emergence of identified resource adequacy concerns. When addressing these concerns the principles of wholesale market operation and design as set out in Article 3 of the Regulation must be taken into account. These principles relate to the operation of electricity markets and are quite wide ranging and high level, covering issues such as market rules, energy storage, cross border flows, regional co-operation, customer empowerment, free price formation and appropriate incentives for long term investment in generation.   Plan was submitted to the Commission in December 2019 detailing the measures adopted, or being adopted, in the SEM, the measures listed under four headings: the I-capacity mechanism; CEP implementation; and CAP implementation. Following receipt of  application will be monitored and the results of this monitoring published in annual reports to be submitted to the Commission. It is important to note that redesign of the Irish wholesale market is far from complete. Further ambitious measures are envisaged, over the coming decade and beyond, recent CEP obligations. DS3 System Services  the dramatic increase in wind penetration levels in recent years, the level of non-synchronous power on the SEM system has risen at a faster rate than in any other region in Europe over this timeframe. It is important to highlight the overwhelming success of the DS3 programme in facilitating the integration of renewables on the SEM system, which in terms of SNSP is unprecedented.  Through the DS3 programme the TSOs on the island of Ireland have developed a unique range of System Services. These new System Services offer an enhanced portfolio of options available to the TSO, and encourage new entrants to the energy market. During a period of considerable upheaval, DS3 provides a reasonably predictable revenue stream, which in conjunction with energy market revenues in the new market and the new CRM, are considered vital to facilitating the necessary investment in flexible generation to meet   In order to address some of the potential problems resulting from these unprecedented levels of intermittent renewables, the DS3 Programme was established by the SEMC to provide for the introduction of a number of new system services by the TSOs, EirGrid and SONI, to ensure a safe and secure energy system, while also facilitating increased levels of   149 non-synchronous generation (primarily renewables). To date, the DS3 Programme has enabled EirGrid and SONI to increase levels of instantaneous system non-synchronous penetration (SNSP) from 50% to 65%, with the aim of increasing this incrementally to 75%. As highlighted in section 2.4.3, ingredient in power generation decarbonisation on the island of Ireland and the integration of record levels of intermittent RES, primarily wind, onto the SEM system. It is important to highlight that the nature of System Services on the Irish system is continuously evolving. The original aim of the DS3 programme was to ensure that the TSO can securely operate the power system with increasing amounts of variable non-synchronous renewable generation over the coming years, as Ireland progressed towards its 2020 renewable electricity target. The existing arrangements give service providers a good estimate of revenues out to 2023, with the possibility to extend to 2026. achieving 70% RES-E by 2030, as highlighted in the Climate Action Plan, providing a host of new challenges for our all-island electricity system. In this regard, the next phase of the TSO System Services programme will be critical in meeting these challenges. Further future development of ancillary services is highlighted as a key action point in the Plan published in June 2019 towards facilitating a very high penetration of variable renewable electricity by 2030 through system services and market arrangements. A set of time bound actions and measures, variously for the CRU and EirGrid up to 2023, are provided at Action 24.  The new market design chosen for the SEM also ensures that liquid and transparent trading arrangements are accessible by all heterogeneous market participants. Transparency of data facilitates competition and provides an effective market power mitigation measure, enabling participants and stakeholders to comprehend price formulation and market signals. Physical cross-zonal capacity is released for use only in centralised short-term markets, facilitating scheduled flows of power to and from the all-island market where it is efficient to do so, and increasing competition and efficiency.  The design provided for Inter-TSO collaboration to effect flows close to real-time and intra-day cross border trades occurring in the Intra-day market in order to facilitate the efficient use of the interconnector in real time.   150 ii. Measures to increase the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production such as smart grids, aggregation, demand response, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, real-time price signals, including the roll-out of intraday market coupling and cross-border balancing markets Initial auctions that have taken place under the new CRM in the SEM have successfully procured future investment in flexible generation, including DSU and battery storage that will particular, the auction results suggest that the advent of the new CRM in the SEM has further spurred development of demand side response. The introduction of a firm Day Ahead Market schedule and price under I-SEM, resulting in more efficient short-term price signals, will also have played a role in stimulating more DSU investment. The roll-out of smart metering in Ireland from 2019 onwards is also anticipated to see a further increase in aggregated demand side response. Looking ahead to future reforms related to demand side participation, in order to comply with participation of DSU in the SEM CRM. When establishing the new CRM, the SEMC determined that DSUs, although able to participate in the CRM auctions, would be exempt from Reliability option (RO) payments where the contracted demand is delivered. RO difference payments would be applied to DSUs only when the demand reduction was not delivered and the Strike Price was exceeded by the Market Reference Price (MRP). This decision recognised the fact that DSUs do not have offsetting energy payments, unlike other auction participants. apply to DSUs, but only as a temporary measure, with the Regulatory Authorities obliged to end the exemption from payback obligations for DSUs from the delivery period starting October 2020. To this end in March 2019 the SEMC proposals for achieving compliance with State aid, following which a formal decision paper was published in July 2019. Due to the timescales involved in making system changes and developing the profiles and code changes required to determine the actual delivered quantity of an Individual Demand Site (IDS) and therefore a DSU and to avoid double-counting of energy, the SEM Committee have proposed an interim solution, with an enduring solution to follow. It includes the following key features:   151  The assumption that dispatched quantity was a suitable proxy for metered quantity for DSUs   Use of the Socialisation Fund to socialise the costs of DSU energy payments across Suppliers; and   Option for DSUs energy payments to be made at all times or only at times of scarcity. Regarding the enduring permanent solution, the SEMC determined that the choice of mechanism should be determined in line with the following principles:   The socialisation mechanism must be robust to the lumpy nature of DSU energy payments and must ensure that all DSU energy payments are made   The recovery mechanism should allocate the costs between Suppliers in a fair and reasonable way, in line with the Equity assessment criteria applied in the design of the I-associated with the production, transportation and consumption of electricity in a fair   The mechanism must be capable of implementation for 1 October 2020  The DS3 Programme has been and will remain a vital ingredient in power generation decarbonisation and procurement of flexible generation on the island of Ireland and the integration of record levels of intermittent RES, primarily wind, onto the SEM system.  The Climate Action Plan commits to strengthening the policy framework to incentivise electricity storage and interconnection. Increased levels of storage and interconnection will be critical to absorbing high levels of renewable generation on to the system, as renewables require back-up which will have to be provided by quick response plant, storage or interconnection. iii. Where applicable, measures to ensure the non-discriminatory participation of renewable energy, demand response and storage, including via aggregation, in all energy markets Non-discriminatory participation of renewables, demand response and storage, national policy in Ireland will continue to be in accordance with and framed by adherence to EU legislation and future implementation of the Clean Energy Package.  Under national legislation, renewable generation currently receives priority dispatch in the Irish wholesale electricity market, notwithstanding that there are occasions when system security necessitates TSO curtailment of non-synchronous generation. Demand Side Units (DSUs) also have non-discriminatory access to wholesale electricity markets in Ireland.    152 iv. Policies and measures to protect customers, especially vulnerable and, where applicable, energy poor customers, and to improve the competitiveness and contestability of the retail energy market Under national objectives to protect energy customers and improve the competitiveness of the retail energy sector the CRU has been assigned a range of statutory functions under the Electricity Regulation Act 1999 (as amended). While electricity and gas retail market prices are no longer regulated, the CRU has a statutory obligation to closely monitor electricity and gas retail markets to ensure that competition continues to develop. The CRU also oversees non-price aspects of competition, and has taken steps to facilitate market access for new supplier firm entrants, and increase transparency and consumer engagement in retail markets. In addition to its continued responsibility for ensuring retail market competition the CRU has an important statutory customer protection role. The CRU conducts regular scrutiny of supply costs, and publishes a suite of reports including monthly switching reports, quarterly market monitoring reports, annual reports and emerging reports based on new market monitoring data and will continue to closely monitor future developments.  Under S.I 630/2011 the CRU has a statutory obligation to monitor retail markets to ensure that final customers are benefiting from competition in the supply of electricity and gas. This includes, but is not limited to:   monitoring final tariffs charged to domestic customers including those on prepayment meters  certification of price comparison websites,   monitoring prices and the levels of discounts available   monitoring the rates of customer switching between licenced electricity and gas suppliers, monitoring disconnection and de-energisation rates   monitoring charges for and the execution of maintenance services, providing a complaints resolution service for domestic customers   monitoring any distortion or restriction of competition in the supply of electricity and gas to final customers  reporting on whether the development and operation of competition in the supply of electricity and gas is benefitting final customers, monitoring the level of market opening and monitoring competition on natural gas exchanges   153 Additionally, under S.I. 463 2011, the CRU has a statutory responsibility for customer protection. In delivering this requirement the CRU established a dedicated and independent Customer Care Team (CCT) who provide free and easy to access services providing information for customers about energy services, including information on consumer rights and obligations and a free dispute resolution service to customers with an unresolved complaint against an energy supplier or network operator. The CCT also operate a quarterly Consumer Stakeholder Group to facilitate consumer engagement. The CCT have powers to issue determinations and directions to suppliers and network operators which can include Team publishes an Annual Report on this service.  Retail market monitoring and reporting and CCT monitoring and reporting forms an important customers, improving competitiveness, highlighting specific issues, assessing existing measures and informing new policy. This results in, for example, periodic review of  Electricity and Gas Supplier Handbook and Codes of Practice ensuring that suppliers adhere to best practices e.g. by updating the customers charter, the code of practice on marketing and advertising, the code of practice on customer sign up, the code of practice on billing, the code of practice on disconnection, the code of practice on complaint handling, the code of practice for vulnerable customers, the code of practice on PAYGM and budget controllers, and the terms and conditions for supply. National policy in relation to vulnerable customers is specifically addressed under S.I. 463/2011. A vulnerable customer is defined as a household customer whdependent on electrically powered equipment, which shall include but is not limited to life protecting devices, assistive technologies to support independent living and medical equipment, or b. particularly vulnerable to disconnection during winter months for reasons of  This S.I. also sets out the obligations placed on suppliers to establish a Priority Services Register of vulnerable customers, obligations in relation to disconnection and annual reporting to CRU. These obligations are further detailed and operationalised via the CRU Code of Practice for Vulnerable Customers and additional measures in the other Codes of Practice (noted above) under the Supplier Handbook. Policies and measures to protect energy poor consumers are additionally provided for under the Strategy to Combat Energy Poverty. This strategy includes housing upgrade energy efficiency measures (e.g. the Better Energy Warmer Homes Scheme) and social protection measures (e.g. the Household Benefits Package and the National Fuel Scheme) that are set out in detail separately in this document.   154 v. Description of measures to enable and develop demand response, including those addressing tariffs to support dynamic pricing Many of the objectives listed under section 2 in relation to the internal energy market, regarding demand response were addressed in the new I-SEM market design and are either already implemented, or being implemented, by the regulators and TSOs as part of that process or are being addressed as part of the implementation of the Electricity Market Regulation in the SEM, again by the Regulators and the TSOs.  As set out in the Climate Action Plan 2019, smart electricity meters will be installed in every house by 2024. The delivery plan will phase in smart services from 2021 giving consumers more choice and information, enabling them to be more proactive in their use of electricity and save money. The DS3 Programme will remain key to achieving a more flexible, dynamic Irish energy system with the objective of raising the already recording breaking levels of intermittent generation penetration in the SEM from the current 65% to 75% by 2020. 3.4.4. Energy Poverty i. Where applicable, policies and measures to achieve the objectives set out in point 2.4.4 Strategy to Combat Energy Poverty is due to be reviewed after 2019. A just Climate Action Plan. The government is committed to taking action to tackle energy poverty. Since the publication of the Government's Strategy to Combat Energy Poverty 2016 - 2019:   the level of energy poverty has dropped from 28% to 17.4%. This is a significant improvement  the proportion of people who report that they are unable to afford to keep the home adequately warm, a decrease on the 2015 figure of 9% to 4.4% The government continues to prioritise measures to tackle energy poverty in Budget 2020, with a record level of funding allocated to retrofitting homes of people in energy poverty. These increases apply to both privately-owned and Local Authority homes.  Protecting the most vulnerable in our communities is a key part of the commitments set out in the Climate Action Plan. The Plan commits to developing a new delivery model for retrofitting. A key part of this will be to ensure that the new delivery model can continue to support those on low incomes who are at risk of energy poverty. An advisory group was established to distinguish the best way to improve the efficiency of the rented sector. The objective is to identify the appropriate policy intervention aiming to   155 ensure that the approach taken minimises adverse impacts on the current accommodation shortage and on people living in energy poverty. An analysis of the responses to a public consultation on the options is currently underway. Following this, recommendations will be made to Government.  Energy Poverty is addressed under the following actions in the Climate Action Plan:  Develop and optimise Government funding and grant schemes to drive demand for energy efficiency retrofits that deliver value for money  enhance the delivery model and supports for households with lower incomes to improve the energy efficiency and comfort of their homes   Review ways to improve how current energy poverty schemes target those most in need  We will carefully examine the impacts (of carbon tax) on low-income and rural households and those experiencing fuel poverty, as well as broader distributional impacts.  We will also examine the interaction between carbon tax rates with other schemes such as efficiency schemes. This will include further consideration of how we can balance the objective of upgrading heating systems with fuel subsidisation for low income households that are using high-carbon heating systems. Existing Measures  Housing Upgrade Energy Efficiency Measures   Better Energy Warmer Homes Scheme  free energy efficiency home upgrades for lower income households, including deeper measures and heating upgrades where appropriate  Better Energy Communities Scheme  subsidised energy efficiency home upgrades for lower income households  Energy Efficiency Obligation Scheme  target for energy suppliers to achieve a % of their target among households in energy poverty  Warmth and Wellbeing pilot scheme  free energy efficiency home upgrade scheme for people with respiratory conditions who are lower income households  Local Authority housing upgrade programme - programme to upgrade the social housing stock    156  Housing Assistance for Older People - support for older people to upgrade their home, can include insulation and heating upgrades in some cases  Housing Adaptation Grant  support for adaptations to the home which can include insulation and heating upgrades in some cases Consumer Protection Measures   Energy Engage Code  the energy industry has commited to never disconnect an engaging customer and to work with their customers on realistic and achievable payment plans for any arrears   Energy Supplier Handbook - a customer charter or code of practice in place that sets out, in plain English, the services an energy supplier will provide and the quality levels offered, including in relation to vulnerable consumers  CRU accredited price comparison websites - accredited comparison websites that can help consumers to find the best supplier and tariff for their needs Social Protection Measures  Household Benefits Package  income support to assist lower income households with their electricity and gas bills  National Fuel Scheme  income support to assist lower income households with their energy costs Planned Measures   Review ways to improve how current energy poverty schemes target those most in need  Develop indicators for energy poverty in Ireland  Budget 2020  announcement of ring-fenced revenue from increases in the carbon tax for climate action, including to fund energy efficiency in low income households and social housing