  67 2.5. Dimension Research, Innovation and Competitiveness i. National objectives and funding targets for public and, where available, private research and innovation relating to the Energy Union, including, where appropriate, a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met technologies must be developed and deployed in the coming years.  A key metric for the assessment of innovation activity is Research & Development (R&D) intensity (R&D expenditure as a percentage of Gross National Product (GNP)) which reflects the extent of research and innovation activities undertaken in a country in terms of resources input. IResearch, Development and Innovation (RDI) intensity rate is estimated at bn) of GNP for 2017, unchanged from the bn) of GNP in 2016 and rbn) in 2015. Since the publication of Innovation 2020 in 2015, direct Exchequer funding of RDI (GBARD) has increased from 2012. Despite the gradual reduction in the RDI intensity rate, GBARD has managed to prevail consistently at around 1% of total Government expenditure since 2011.  011.  However, reaching the 2.5% of GNP intensity rate target presents a very significant challenge. In 2017 our GNP intensity level stood at an estimated 1.46% of GNP, down from 1.99% in 2012. Even when using GNI* as a complementary indicator (GNI* removes globalisation impacts on the Irish economy), the RDI intensity rate is estimated at 1.87% for 2017. This is in part due to the strength of our economic performance and subsequent increases in GNP growth rates year on year over the last number of years. Our challenge is to increase the level of investment in RDI to keep pace with GNP growth rates. Innovation 2020 -year strategy on research and development of science and technology. Innovation 2020 sets out the roadmap for continuing progress towards the goal of making Ireland a Global Innovation Leader, driving a strong sustainable economy and a better society. Innovation 2020 recognises energy as one of six enterprise themes which are of particular importance to Ireland, and calls for greater use of RDI funding to find solutions to pressing societal challenges in areas such as energy.  R&D intensity is low relative to the target set by the European Commission. In addition, analysis by the   68 one of the lowest in the OECD. In order to address this, DCCAE intends to increase in a stepwise fashion public funding for the SEAI National Energy Research Development & Demonstration (RD&D) Funding Programme. This funding will supplement the funding provided to the Prototype Development Fund, and other national initiatives funded by other to instigate new initiatives, expand current activities, develop strategic collaborative partnerships with national & international organisations and further strengthen the capacity of the energy RD&D system in Ireland. This increased investment in energy RD&D will also assist Ireland in meeting its medium and long term low-carbon transition targets & obligations and will unlock enterprise opportunities for Irish businesses.  ii. Where available, national 2050 objectives related to the promotion of clean energy technologies and, where appropriate, national objectives, including long-term targets (2050) for deployment of low-carbon technologies, including for decarbonising energy and carbon-intensive industrial sectors and, where applicable, for related carbon transport and storage infrastructure Ireland supports the emerging ambition to achieve a net zero target across the EU by 2050. This plan commits to evaluate in detail the changes required to adopt such a goal in Ireland. Ireland has sought a pathway to 2030 which would be consistent with a net zero target by 2050. In order to meet these targets, it is possible that residual emissions in some sectors may need to be balanced by negative emissions technologies in energy systems and increased levels of afforestation. consistent with the adoption of a net zero target in Ireland by 2050. The Plan also commits to evaluating in detail the changes which would be necessary in Ireland to achieve this target. It also outlines an approach to carbon neutrality in the agriculture and land-use sector, including forestry, which does not compromise on national capacity for sustainable food production. The first action in this Climate Action Plan is to evaluate in detail the changes required to adopt a more ambitious commitment of net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. This aims to finalise Ire-term climate strategy by the end of 2019, as per the advice of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the recommendation of the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Climate Action, which will help formulate the objectives for the 2050 plan.  The societal benefits of research and innovation are both significant in scale and wide-ranging. Research & innovation play a key role in addressing global and national challenges,   69 onomy and society.  comprising the Climate Action Fund, Disruptive Technologies Innovation Fund, the Urban Regeneration and Development Fund, and the Rural Regeneration and Development Fund. These funds will have a collective budget amounting bn over the ten-year period of Project Ireland 2040. Each of the four funds has been established to pursue distinct objectives, which must also be aligned with the strategic investment priorities and the National Strategic Outcomes of Project Ireland 2040. Whilst three of the funds are not specifically aligned with climate action, the Climate Action Fund is fully dedicated to activities d will fund initiatives that contribute -effective manner. It offers the potential for innovative interventions which in the absence of support from the fund, would not otherwise be developed.  There is a need to ensure that the best scientific evidence and advice is available to strategically programmed and built a strong energy and climate science research and performing organisations to carry out science and policy-relevant research. The update to national research priorities for 2018 to 2023 reflects the increased urgency of the need to address climate change, with a new research priority theme focusing on Energy, Climate Action and Sustainability, and two priority areas concentrating on decarbonising and sustainable living and also smart and sustainable food production and processing. The National Energy RD&D and Ocean Energy Prototype Development Funding Programmes fund the deployment of research, development & demonstration stage energy/low-carbon technology pilot facilities. This funding aims to stimulate and accelerate the development & deployment of energy/low-carbon technology related products, processes and out internationally leading RD&D activities; and to support solutions that enable technical & other barriers to market uptake of energy/low-carbon technology related products, processes -Plan Steering Group and within individual SET-Plan Implementation Groups, research calls are aligned with SET-Plan priorities. This enables better alignment of Irish research priorities with research and innovation programmes both at EU level and across other member states. This also increases co-operation between national programmes to avoid duplication of research.   70 The EP-2020 is framed by the need for Ireland to transition to a carbon neutral, low-emission and climate-resilient economy and society by 2050, and will become a source of climate change information and solutions. An interim review of this programme is underway and will inform the remainder of the current programme, as well as the development of a new programme for post-2020. Electricity Infrastructure: goals by 2030:  Reduce CO2 eq. emissions from the sector by 5055% relative to 2030 Pre-NDP projections  Deliver an early and complete phase-out of coal- and peat-fired electricity generation  Increase electricity generated from renewable sources to 70%, indicatively comprised of : o at least 3.5 GW of offshore renewable energy o up to 1.5 GW of grid-scale solar energy o up to 8.2 GW total of increased onshore wind capacity  Meet 15% of electricity demand by renewable sources contracted under Corporate PPAs A number of major electricity infrastructure upgrades/extensions are planned or are in progress, including the North-South Interconnector Project (new 400kV line connecting Ireland and Northern Ireland); the West Dublin Project (220/110kV substation installation connecting to an existing 220kV double circuit line) to meet local demand for electricity; the Laois/Kilkenny Project (new 400/110kV substation near Portlaoise looped into an existing 400kV and 110kV line, connected to a new 110/38kV substation in Kilkenny by new 110kV lines); and the Celtic Interconnector. EirGrid estimates that implementation of the Climate  Transport Infrastructure: Climate Action Plan commits to achieving the following goals by 2030:  Reduce CO2 eq. emissions from the sector by 4550% relative to 2030 pre-NDP projections  Increase the number of EVs to 936,000, comprised of: o 840,000 passenger EVs o 95,000 electric vans and trucks   71 o 1,200 electric buses  Build the EV charging network to support the growth of EVs at the rate required, and develop our fast-charging infrastructure to stay ahead of demand  Require at least one recharging point in new non-residential buildings with more than 10 parking spaces  Raise the blend proportion of biofuels in road transport to 10% in petrol and 12% in diesel  Storage infrastructure: The only large scale energy storage device in Ireland is a pumped hydro station at Turlough Hill, consisting of 4 x 73MW generators, and with a storage Transition to a Low Carbon Energy Future 2015-2030, states that Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) is recognised as a potential bridging technology that could support the transition to a low carbon economy. Ireland adopted a 5-year CCS review process, which will inform any decision to commit resources to put regulatory and permitting systems in place. ional Mitigation Plan 2017 includes a specific action for DCCAE to carry out an exploration of the feasibility of utilising suitable reservoirs for CO2 storage. Support for Deployment of Low-Carbon Technologies in Ireland: The SEAI technology team provides energy/low carbon technology sector market support and technology-related policy support to DCCAE. It covers areas such as wind & electricity, heat & bioenergy, solar, ocean and smart grids. The group develops technology roadmaps (informed by SEAI modelling), promotes the growth of relevant supply chains, represents Ireland in technology fora, develops guidance relevant to technology sub-sectors for suppliers, installers, manufacturers and consumers, and supports critical supply chain development, often in collaboration with partner state agencies such as the Industrial Development Authority of Ireland (IDA Ireland) and Enterprise Ireland.  In 2020 SEAI plans to carry out a detailed technology analysis of each energy/low carbon -term targets. This modelling will assist with the targeting of energy research & innovation investment prioritisation with a view of achieving targets in 2030 and 2050, with a view of building capacity in the energy research & innovation system in Ireland, and developing enterprise opportunities. It will then analyse the RD&D readiness of technologies against what research resources are available and identify any gaps for these technologies and how targeted mission-oriented RD&D can fill those gaps. Technologies identified as ready for market deployment will be analysed to identify their respective resources and any gaps that may need to be addressed to support   72 mass deployment of that technology to help Ireland achieve it 2030 and 2050 target and objectives. Finally, for mature technologies SEAI will continue to examine how it can maximise supply chain opportunities.  iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to competitiveness   reports to the Irish Government on key competitiveness issues facing the Irish economy and provides recommendations on policy drawn from iveness Challenge 2019 report, published in December 2019. The report identifies a range of recommendations that address both immediate competitiveness issues, and more medium-competitiveness and productivity performance. The report notes that climate change and competitive position. Climate disruption is already having diverse and wide-ranging ent, society, and economy. Looking to the future, the NCC intends to move the publication of the Competitiveness Challenge to an earlier point in the calendar year so that the recommendations can be better integrated into the European Semester process. Structural reforms that focus on promoting growth and employment in line with the Europe 2020 strategy, and that increase productivity and growth potential in the member states are an integral part of addressing the economic challenges facing Ireland and the EU.  Competitiveness is a multidimensional concept incorporating many interlinked and interdependent factors. Reflecting this complexity, Irela competitiveness performance. Competitiveness performance reflects the interaction of a wide range of factors that, combined, determine the ability of firms to compete successfully indices has improved in recent years.  The 2019 World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report showed Ireland ranked Business report placed Ireland 23rd out of 190 economies. The 2018 Globalisation Report ranks Ireland the most globalised economy in the EU. Exports and Imports as a percentage of GDP were 120 per cent and 88 per cent respectively in 2017. Trade as a proportion of GDP in Ireland is significantly above Euro area and OECD averages.  