  54 2.4. Dimension Internal Energy Market 2.4.1. Electricity Interconnectivity i. The level of electricity interconnectivity that the Member State aims for in 2030 in consideration of the electricity interconnection target for 2030 of at least 15%, with a strategy with the level from 2021 onwards defined in close co-operation with affected Member States, taking into account the 2020 interconnection target of 10% and the following indicators of the urgency of action: 1) Price differential in the wholesale market exceeding an indicative threshold of EUR 2/MWh between Member States, regions or bidding zones; 2) Nominal transmission capacity of interconnectors below 30 % of peak load; 3) Nominal transmission capacity of interconnectors below 30 % of installed renewable generation. Each new interconnector shall be subject to a socioeconomic and environmental cost-benefit analysis and implemented only if the potential benefits outweigh the costs ent on Electricity Interconnection emphasises the important role of interconnection in the transition to a low carbon energy future. level of interconnection is currently reported by the European Commission as 7.4%. When the UK leaves the EU, Ireland will have no direct electrical interconnection with the rest of the EU. However, there are three interconnectors, all on the 4th PCI list, that are steadily maturing towards construction. Two will connect with the UK and the third with France. Their combined capacity will be 2,700MW and the last of the three is scheduled for energisation in 2026. The latest  report also includes up to two additional interconnectors across three of its sc non-generation flexibility mix need by 2040.  The Climate Action Plan 2019 states the importance of developing further interconnection to 0% renewable electricity. However, due to the continuing EU, a national interconnection target has not yet been established.   55 2.4.2. Energy Transmission Infrastructure i. Key electricity and gas transmission infrastructure projects, and, where relevant, modernisation projects, that are necessary for the achievement of objectives and targets under the five dimensions of the Energy Union Strategy On 31 October 2019 the European Commission published the updated list of Projects of Common Interest (PCIs), the fourth such list, which is published on the EC website. PCIs are intended to help the EU achieve its energy policy and climate objectives: affordable, secure and sustainable energy for all citizens. There are five Irish electricity PCIs included in this fourth list, four interconnection PCIs and one new storage PCI together with one gas project and one Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) project.  Table 12: Irish projects included on the fourth PCI list PCI Number Project Promoter Project Title 1.6 EirGrid & Réseau de (RTE) France - Ireland interconnection (known as Celtic Interconnector) 1.9.1 Third party Ireland  United Kingdom interconnection (known as Greenlink) 2.13.1 EirGrid & SONI Ireland  United Kingdom interconnection (known as North-South Interconnector) 2.13.2 EirGrid & SONI Ireland  United Kingdom interconnection (known as Renewable Integration Development Project, RIDP) 5.3 Shannon LNG Shannon LNG Terminal and connecting pipeline 12.6 Ervia Ervia Cork CCS Project 2.29 Third party Hydroelectric Power Station Silvermines  The European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E) publishes a Ten Year Network Development Plan (TYNDP) every two years. The most recent TYNDP is TYNDP 2018. The TYNDP includes projects of pan-European significance. The Irish projects include the five electricity PCIs listed above and the following two projects:      56 Table 13: Irish projects included in TYNDP 2018 TYNDP Number Project Promoter Project Title 349 Third party Marex Organic Power Interconnector 1030 Third party Marex Organic Power Energy Storage  ii. Where applicable, main infrastructure projects envisaged other than Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) To help plan and the develop energy networks for the future, both EirGrid and Gas Networks Ireland produce ten year network development plans. EirGrid also produces a ten year Generation Capacity Statement and a ten year All-Island Transmission Forecast Statement. These network development plans and statements are future looking documents that allow both EirGrid and Gas Networks Ireland (GNI) to assess the demand for and development of energy networks and related infrastructure in Ireland. In addition to the PCI projects set out above and the projects developed by EirGrid and Gas Networks Ireland there are a number of private sector infrastructure projects which could -national level. In addition, as Ireland transitions itself to a low carbon economy, the gas and electricity networks must be planned and developed to make the transition as smooth as possible. As we make the transition the energy networks in Ireland will face many challenges. For example, as the penetration of electricity generated from wind increases the electricity network must be flexible to handle the unpredictability of wind while still operating in a secure manner. The increased penetration of wind energy also places an increased reliance on Ireland Following on from EU support to twin the final 50 km of the gas interconnector system from Scotland to Ireland, further work has commenced by Gas Networks Ireland to fully separate the two gas interconnectors which will further increase the resilience, flexibility and capacity of the gas system.  Every year the Commission for the Regulation of Utilities (CRU) holds a public consultation on Gas Networks Ireland's Network Development Plan and on Development Plan. The CRU's public consultation gives stakeholders the opportunity to express their views on the plans.   57 The Development Plans views of the future needs of the gas and electricity networks in Ireland. It also presents plans to meet the needs of the network over a ten-year period. The Development Plans include, among other things, investment needs, planned network investment, supply and demand forecasts.  2.4.3. Market Integration Reform of the Wholesale Electricity Market and Decarbonising the Electricity System s recent wholesale electricity market redesign, together with other related initiatives, form an interlinked policy-aligned system of measures which underpin and facilitate greater renewable electricity penetration in Ireland and progressive decarbonisation of its wholesale electricity sector, and also ensure efficiency and security of electricity supply. recent wholesale electricity market redesign, together with other related initiatives, form an interlinked policy-aligned system of measures which underpin and facilitate greater renewable electricity penetration in Ireland and progressive decarbonisation of its wholesale electricity sector, and also ensure efficiency and security of electricity supply. The new system comprises both policy and regulatory measures which can be grouped under three headings as follows:  I-), recently launched and fully compliant with EU Third and Clean Energy packages  A new competitive auction-based capacity mechanism in the wholesale market (fully compliant with state aid measures and Clean Energy package)  Regulated TSO payments for system services known as DS3 These elements correspond to payment categories, or revenue streams, that the electricity industry can expect from the market, for energy, capacity and system services respectively. The implementation of reforms in these revenue streams provides industry with the certainty needed for them to invest and encourages this to happen in ways that also contribute to the goal of secure and efficient decarbonisation. These interlocking measures are designed to work together and reinforce each other and thereby facilitate delivery of energy policy goals over a sustained period, in line with typical electricity market investment time frames over approach to decarbonising its electricity market to take these elements together as a coherent whole, rather than evaluate any one of market, capacity or system services measures separately.      58 Wholesale Electricity Market  SEM and I-SEM The Single Electricity Market (SEM) is the wholesale electricity market for the island of Ireland, regulated jointly by the national regulatory authority in Ireland, CRU, and its counterpart in Northern Ireland, the Utility Regulator (UR). By combining what were two separate jurisdictional electricity markets (for Ireland and Northern Ireland), the SEM became one of the first of its kind in Europe when it went live on 1 November 2007.  A new market design for the SEM, substantially different to the original 2007 design took place under the Integrated Single Electricity Market (I-SEM) Project which took over six years and went live on 1st October 2018 . This included the establishment of new Day-Ahead, Intra-Day and Balancing Markets, with an ex ante clearing price compared to the previous ex-post gross mandatory pool system, and a new obligation on participants to take responsibility for imbalances. This market redesign had the objectives of facilitating greater market integration through the application of internal energy market rules and enhancing competitive outcomes to benefit consumers. Finally it also had the objective of ensuring compliance with the network codes and guidelines developed under Regulation (EC) 714/2009 Package and with the principles of wholesale market design laid out in the Clean Energy Package, and in particular the recast electricity market regulation. The new SEM market arrangements are delivering a range of benefits to Irish consumers and the energy system as a whole. For instance, more competitive trading arrangements facilitate better use of existing infrastructure assets in the electricity system, as highlighted by the significant increase in the efficiency of interconnector flows between the SEM and Great Britain (GB) since October 2018. Through the ability to trade closer to real time, the new market design is promoting the continued growth of renewable generation and decarbonisation of Irish power generation. This will facilitate swifter decarbonisation of power generation, thereby helping Ireland to meet its ambitious 70% renewables target contained in the Climate Action Plan published in June 2019, at lowest cost to consumers.  The New SEM Capacity Mechanism  In parallel with the I-SEM market design project, a new competitive capacity remuneration mechanism (CRM) was introduced, having been approved for State Aid by the European Commission in November 2017. As noted above, the CRM is an integral component, rather than an annex, of the new SEM design and facilitates continued decarbonisation of power generation on the island of Ireland, while maintaining system and resource adequacy. Concern over system security and the level of future long-term investment is particularly prevalent in the SEM due to the small size of the market, the large and rising volume of   59 intermittant renewable energy on the island of Ireland, and the proportionally large generation sets in the SEM, with its limited high voltage direct current (HVDC) interconnection.  The value of capacity in the market under the new CRM is now determined through competitive auction, with penalties for generators in receipt of reliability option payments that are unavailable to produce when required by the TSO. A number of successful auctions have already taken place under the new CRM, which in addition to securing necessary future capacity have facilitated future investment in the flexible generation, demand side renewables generation.  The recast Electricity Market Regulation requires Member States with capacity mechanisms to carry out certain tasks, depending inter alia on whether the Member State intends to have, or already has, in place a capacity mechanism and, if the latter, on the timing of its capacity auctions. This includes the submission of an Implementation Plan containing timelines for adopting measures to eliminate any identified regulatory distortions or market failures causing resource adequacy concerns. In December 2019 Ireland submitted its draft Implementation Plan for Commission opinion. The Commission will issue its opinion on this plan in the coming months and may invite Ireland to amend the implementation plan. Ireland will produce and publish an annual report monitoring the application of the implementation plan, and submit this to the Commission, in accordance with the requirements of the Regulation. DS3 System Services recent years, the level of non-synchronous power on the SEM system has risen at a faster rate than in any other region in Europe over this timeframe. In order to address some of the potential problems resulting from these unprecedented levels of intermittent renewables, the DS3 Programme was established by the Single Electricity Market Committee (SEMC) to provide for the introduction of a number of new system services by the TSOs, EirGrid and SONI, to ensure a safe and secure energy system, while also facilitating increased levels of non-synchronous generation (primarily renewables). To date, the DS3 Programme has enabled EirGrid and SONI to increase levels of instantaneous system non-synchronous penetration (SNSP) from 50% to 65%, with the aim of increasing this incrementally to 75% in 2020. The DS3 programme has therefore been overwhelmingly successful in facilitating the integration of renewables on the SEM system, which in terms of SNSP is unprecedented.    60 Given the relatively recent launch of both the wholesale market rules and the associated capacity mechanism as well as the ongoing development of the system services market arrangements and allow a sufficient period for them to be applied and deliver results and benefits, rather than countenance any second such fundamental market reform programme. into the following areas:  new market rules (I-SEM) implementation issues  adjustments to the capacity mechanism, specifically to meet requirements of the State aid approval   Changes in the wholesale electricity market from Implementation of the Electricity Regulation i. National objectives related to other aspects of the internal energy market such as increasing system flexibility, in particular related to the promotion of competitively determined electricity prices in line with relevant sectoral law, market integration and coupling, aimed at increasing the tradeable capacity of existing interconnectors, smart grids, aggregation, demand response, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, and real-time price signals, including a timeframe for when the objectives shall be met tive relating to the EU internal energy market is, and has been over the long term, to continue to deepen the integration of  wholesale electricity market, and its regulation, with the EU internal energy market (IEM), building on well-known ongoing plans, programmes and actions in this regard. As has been the position for many years, it is the objective of Ireland to participate and contribute in the continued development of the EU IEM, and remain coupled with other EU electricity markets to as great an extent as possible.  From the market regulation perspective, the main elements of the objective consist of:  Maintaining and developing the successful all island wholesale Single Electricity Market, or SEM, to include ensuring that all aspects of the new I-SEM market, the capacity mechanism and other planned/signalled reforms are fully implemented, over the next few years  Implementing the requirements of the Third Energy package Network Codes and Guidelines and the Electricity Regulation and Directive of the Clean Energy Package (CEP) in the Irish electricity and gas markets   61  approval  Designing and implementing the next phase of the DS3 System Services programme to provide enhanced system flexibility to accommodate increased renewables on the electricity system The new market and its associated capacity mechanism were launched in October 2018. Developing and implementing the new market design was a huge project, entitled the I-SEM project, taking over six years, involving considerable input from the Department; Regulators; the TSOs and industry. Many of the objectives listed above in relation to the internal energy market, such as market integration and coupling, aimed at increasing the tradable capacity of existing interconnectors, smart grids, aggregation, demand response, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, and real-time price signals were addressed in the new I-SEM market design and are either already implemented, or being implemented, by the regulators and TSOs as part of that process or are being addressed as part of the implementation of the Electricity Regulation in the SEM, again by the regulators and the TSOs.   the electricity market in 2011 and in the gas market in 2014. The development of competition for the benefit of final consumers is a regulatory function, formally expressed in legislation since 2011, with various regulatory actions and initiatives, including analysis and publications, having been progressed over recent years. These are further detailed in section 2.4.3(v) below and in the associated policies and measures section. Ireland welcomes the completion of the CEP and is fully committed to implementation of these ambitious and far reaching legislative files over the coming years, with a view to increasing power generation decarbonisation. It is important to note the scale and depth of reforms to the SEM already implemented or in the process of being implemented under the I-SEM project and its associated capacity mechanism, required a significant effort from the regulators, TSOs and industry. As a result of the design and implementation of the I-SEM arrangements, the SEM new market design is compliant in many aspects with the electricity market regulation. Meeting the remaining associated additional requirements is now the objective for the SEM and doing so will assist in meeting the ambitious 70% renewables target set out in the Climate Action Plan.    62 The Climate Action Plan 2019 contains measures requiring EirGrid to continue the roll out of its multi-year DS3 programme. This work programme includes enhancing generation portfolio performance, developing new operational policies and system tools to efficiently use the generation portfolio to the best of its capabilities and regularly reviewing the needs of the system as the portfolio capability evolves. As these challenges are being encountered on the island of Ireland before they become critical for larger electricity systems elsewhere, Ireland and Northern Ireland have the opportunity to lead the way in the integration of renewable generation. ii. Where applicable, national objectives related to the non-discriminatory participation of renewable energy, demand response and storage, including via aggregation, in all energy markets, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met Participation in the day-ahead, intra-day and balancing markets introduced under the I-SEM project is already non-discriminatory for all market participants, including renewables, Demand Side Units (DSU) and battery storage. In addition, it should be noted that all technologies are permitted to participate in the new SEM capacity mechanism which received State Aid approval from the European Commission in November 2017. Therefore, no national objective as regards participation in the various timeframes would appear to be relevant.  As part of the overall process of implementing the CEP, new rules regarding dispatch and priority dispatch contained in the recast electricity market regulation will be implemented. As regards demand response, Ireland has historically witnessed a relatively inflexible electricity demand profile, largely part due to the small proportion of heavy industry in the domestic economy compared to other European economies. There has been a sharp rise in demand-side participation in the capacity auctions in the new SEM market, which evidence suggests is attributable to greater investment certainty provided by the all-new CRM, according to the Irish TSO. Noting the important role that can be played by active demand towards meeting future decarbonisation goals, this is a welcome development. It should be noted that time bound commitments with regard to DSU participation entered into ate Aid ruling are scheduled to be rolled out by the CRU over the coming years.   63 iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to ensuring that consumers participate in the energy system and benefit from self-generation and new technologies, including smart meters enabling them to sell excess electricity they have produced back to the grid. In this regard, we have established the following key objectives: Smart Meters  As set out in the Climate Action Plan 2019, smart-ready electricity meters will be installed in every house by 2024   The rollout will occur in a structured and phased basis, commencing with an initial delivery of 250,000 meters between September 2019 and the end of 2020 and a further 500,000 meters every year from 2021 to 2024  The delivery plan will phase in smart services from 2021 giving consumers more choice and information, enabling them to be more proactive in their use of electricity and save money Micro-Generation  Deliver pilot solar photovoltaic (PV) micro-generation scheme with a view to commencement of an enduring support scheme by 2021 to ensure that people can sell excess electricity they produce back to the grid  Develop an enabling framework for micro- generation which tackles existing barriers and establishes suitable supports within relevant market segments  Deliver the Smart Metering Programme in line with current planned timelines that will support the market for micro-generation Route to Market for Renewable Energy Generation  Design and implement the RESS. Increase the volumes and frequencies of RESS auctions to deliver on the 70% renewable electricity target by 2030 ensuring an appropriate enterprise/community mix to achieve an efficient delivery of renewables   Ensure that 15% of electricity demand is met by renewable sources contracted under Corporate Power Purchase Agreements (CPPAs) Regulatory Streamlining of Renewables and Grid Development   64  Ensure that the network operators (Electricity Supply Board (ESB) Networks and EirGrid) plan network and deliver on connecting renewable energy sources to meet the 2030 70% RES-E target  Ensure that renewable electricity grid connection policy is fit for purpose to deliver on renewable energy targets and community projects, and report annually on the timeliness of grid connection  Facilitate additional hybrid connections (e.g. solar/wind/batteries) operating in the electricity market to increase RES-E penetration   Implement energy actions under the Government Statement on the Role of Data Centres regionally balanced to minimise grid reinforcements  The revised updated planning guidelines for onshore wind energy development were issued for public consultation in December 2019  Further consider facilitation of private networks/direct lines  Assess the network development required to integrate higher levels of RES-E and develop a high-level network development plan to (and beyond) 2030  Facilitate very high penetration of variable renewable electricity by 2030 (both SNSP and average) through system services and market arrangements iv. National objectives with regard to ensuring electricity system adequacy, as well as for the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met A core objective of changes to market trading rules introduced in recent years has been to facilitate a more flexible energy system, with increased efficiency of cross border trade across interconnectors and the additional volumes of renewables, DSU and storage required to facilitate power generation decarbonisation. In addition, a more flexible energy system, which can integrate higher volumes of renewables onto the grid, is paramount to meeting the ambitious goals outlined in the Climate Action Plan.  island of Ireland. It is important to note that in addition to procuring necessary capacity, the auctions that have so far taken place under the SEM CRM since November 2017 have delivered investment in the future flexible generation, demand-side response, and battery storage. Apart from maintaining the mechanism in line with market lifecycles and needs assessment, the objective in respect of the capacity mechanism is to ensure continued   65 November 2017, as well as compliance with Chapter IV of the Clean Energy Package recast Electricity Market Regulation.  As regards flexibility, the DS3 Programme will remain key to achieving a more flexible Irish energy system with the objective of raising the already record breaking levels of intermittent generation penetration in the SEM from the current 65% to 75% by 2020. The Climate Action Plan contains a number of actions and timelines for the Irish TSO and NRA, as well as the Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment (DCCAE), to ensure technical analysis by EirGrid to identify impediments to managing a real time operational limit of over 90% SNSP by 2030.  v. Where applicable, national objectives to protect energy consumers and improve the competitiveness of the retail energy sector Consistent with European energy regulation policy, the electricity and gas markets in Ireland are commercial, liberalised, and competitive. The CRU ended its regulation of retail market prices for electricity in 2011 and for gas in 2014. The position of successive Governments is that competitive energy markets result in greater choice for consumers and businesses, in terms of suppliers, products and prices. Government policy on energy costs is focused on supporting the competitive market to drive down prices.  While electricity and gas retail market prices are no longer regulated, the CRU has a statutory obligation to closely monitor electricity and gas retail markets to ensure that competition continues to develop.  Regarding future national objectives, the CRU will continue to monitor the retail market to ensure that final customers are benefiting from competition in the supply of electricity and of the development of competition, wider market monitoring, dispute resolution and enforcement functions. The CRU also has a statutory responsibility for customer protection under S.I. 463 2011. This S.I. sets out national consumer protection objectives to protect energy customers specifically addressing matters relating to vulnerable customers, customer charters, codes of practice for consumer protection, dispute resolution, single points of contact for information, and enforcement powers for CRU.  In addition, it is a priority objective to transpose and implement the CEP Directive on the common rules for the internal market in electricity noting in particular the provisions in Chapter 3 relating to consumer empowerment and protection. This includes providing more information to the consumer to enable informed decisions about their market participation.   66 This is to be done by requiring further information to be available on consumer contracts and energy bills, and also by providing consumers with accurate price comparison tools which will enable informed switching decisions. Additionally, the Directive provides that consumers should have access to smart meters which will provide up-to-date and accurate data, but which will not jeopardise their privacy with regards to personal information. These smart meters should also not be a barrier to supplier switching, and all consumers should be able to freely switch suppliers without incurring switching related fees.  The Directive also calls for regulatory frameworks to be developed for independent aggregators and for demand response along principles that enable their full participation in the market.  2.4.4.  Energy Poverty Where applicable, national objectives with regard to energy poverty, including a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met alleviating energy poverty which sets out current objectives in relation to energy poverty. The strategy aims to alleviate the burden of energy poverty on the most vulnerable in society through actions focused on improving the efficiency of homes, supporting lower income households with their energy costs and minimising the costs to consumers associated with action on climate change and with ensuring security of supply. The strategy is due to be reviewed in 2020 and new objectives will be set then, where appropriate.  Analysis conducted in 2016 indicated that 28% of Irish households were at risk of energy poverty. In 2019 this had reduced to 17.4%. Research carried out by the Economic and Social Research Institute in Ireland has found that, in Ireland, energy poverty is not a distinct type of deprivation. In other words, households that experience basic deprivation and households that experience fuel poverty are one and the same. In order to target households in fuel poverty, it is appropriate to target households in poverty. Ireland has an overall target to reduce consistent poverty to 2 per cent or less by 2020. We also have a target contribution to the EU 2020 Poverty target to lift at least 200,000 people out of 'combined poverty' (i.e. the combination of consistent poverty, at-risk-of-poverty and basic deprivation) between 2010 and 2020. 