3.3. Dimension Energy Security  i. Policies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.3 Ireland is committed to maintaining the security of our energy system in the most cost-effective manner. Ireland is cognisant of the risks posed by the impacts of climate change to our energy security. The policies and measures set out under this plan, both in terms of mitigation and adaptation, serve to offset those risks. In addition, the impact of the wide range of policies and measures aimed at increasing energy efficiency will contribute considerably to ensuring security of our energy system. Ireland has established quantifiable objectives regarding indigenous production of clean energy. These together with the measures detailed in this plan regarding improving the flexibility of our system will strengthen al with the consequences of the planned closure of the coal and peat plants. systems is being carried out. The focus of the review is the period to 2030 in the context of ensuring a sustainable pathway to 2050. In terms of gas and electricity the key policies and measures, in line with national policy including Irelan Programme for Government, include:  In the context of decarbonisation, put in place the appropriate measures to maintain the resilience of gas and electricity systems in the period to 2030 in the context of ensuring a sustainable pathway to 2050   136  Support efforts to increase indigenous renewable sources in the energy mix, including wind, solar and bioenergy  Develop, maintain and upgrade the electricity and gas networks to ensure that our energy system remains safe, secure and ready to meet increased demand;  Actively participate in EU Project of Common Interest (PCI) process including supporting projects which enhance energy security and are consistent with national and EU climate policy objectives;  Following the United Kingdom leaving the EU, work closely with our EU partners and the United Kingdom to put in place a framework for regional co-operation between the EU and the United Kingdom in relation to Emergency Preparedness and Response The need for adaptation to address the current and future risks posed by a changing climate is both urgent and essential to successfully transition to a climate resilient economy and society by 2050. As referred to under the section on adaptation, tackling climate change will take the effort of our entire society and the electricity and gas networks sector is no different. As these changes continue and if, as predicted, increase over the coming decades, the energy sector must prepare for, and adapt to, these new conditions. By identifying areas of vulnerability now, steps can be taken and measures put in place to avoid or minimise future adverse impacts within the sector and to exploit opportunities. The Electricity and Gas Networks Sectoral Climate Change Adaptation Plan was published in September 2019 and represents a first step towards reducing vulnerability and building resilience in the sector. The plan sets out a number of key objectives and actions for implementation membership of the European Union (Directive 2009/119/EC) and the International Energy Agency (IEA). Ireland holds 90 days of a strategic oil reserve, to be used in the event of a l reserve. NORA is funded by a Government levy of 2 cents per litre on oil disposals. At the end of 2017, NORA held approximately 68% of its stocks on the island of Ireland, with the remaining 32% of stocks held abroad In the event of an oil supply disruption, the Department will liaise with NORA and the oil industry on the evolving situation. Where a stock release is warranted, a recommendation is made to the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and Environment by Departmental officials. The Minister informs his cabinet colleagues of his decision and instructs NORA to release stocks, specifying the product categories, volumes and location from which the   137 stocks are to be released. NORA has a Stock Drawdown Plan in place to deal with such a situation. NORA has also Memoranda of Agreement with five shipping companies that and abroad to where it is needed in the event of a shortage of supply.  In the case of a domestic issue requiring stock drawdown, the Department would inform the EU/IEA of its actions and make arrangements with NORA on the replenishment of stocks. In the case of collective EU or IEA action, stocks would be released in accordance with agreed procedures. The Department is currently developing the Oil Emergency Allocation Plan (OEAP) to enable the allocation of oil to ensure the continuation of societal functioning in a scenario where oil availability is limited. The Plan provides for the allocation of petroleum fuels and in response to a prolonged fuel supply disruption within the state. The Plan is modular in nature, consisting of a number of schemes, which, if required, may be enacted in their entirety, depending on the extent and duration of the emergency and the fuel type(s) in short supply. Quantities of fuel allocated to various fuel users may also be varied during the lifetime of the plan, based on the level o The Department works closely with NORA and the Irish oil industry (through IPIA  the Irish Petroleum Industry Association) on the development of oil emergency management policies and procedures. NORA updates its stock drawdown procedure at least annually. A number of cross sectoral oil emergency exercises have been held, involving the other Government Departments, NORA, and the IPIA, with the most recent being in November 2018. These are scenario based and explore the impacts of an oil emergency across all sectors, with an emphasis on a whole of government level response, taking into account the extent of the supply deficit in the market. Refined product is largely sourced from the UK, with crude being imported from Norway. The however the UK will most likely remain the predominant source for imported refined product. Group, Ireland will continue to cooperate with the UK on matters of oil security through our joint membership of the International Energy Agency (IEA). As Ireland has no commercial oil reserves, by necessity all oil is imported. The oil market is largely deregulated, with the oil companies sourcing product based on cost and logistical factors. While it is expected that the decarbonisation of transport and heating will decrease petroleum product usage over time, currently the demand for refined product within the Irish   138 market is increasing year on year, driven largely by demand from the aviation industry. Although the increased use of biofuels will displace a small volume of petroleum product, there is no expectation that Ireland will be able to decrease its reliance on imported oil product in the short to medium term. ii. Regional co-operation in this area In order to ensure continued and ongoing regional co-operation Ireland will:  Continue to implement the requirements of EU regulation 2017/1938 (Measures to safeguard security of gas supply) including risk assessments, preventative action plans, emergency plans, and solidarity. The CRU (CRU) is the designated competent authority for this regulation  Implement the requirements of EU regulation 2019/941, which came into force on 4 July 2019, on Risk Preparedness in the Electricity Sector. This Regulation provides for Member States co-operation on common methods for assessing risks and to establish a framework for a more systematic monitoring of security of supply issues;   Seek to maintain strong regional co-operation with the UK on emergency preparedness and response for gas and electricity including solidarity in an emergency situation  Following the United Kingdom leaving the EU, work with EU partners and the UK to identify and put in place any measures and arrangements necessary for continued regional co-operation on emergency preparedness and response, and security of supply for gas/electricity systems  Participate in EU fora for gas, electricity and oil security of supply;  Cooperate with the Department of the Economy in Northern Ireland on the all-island dimensions of oil security, in particular around the utilisation of import infrastructure on an island wide basis, in the event of a disruption to the capacity to move product through a major oil terminal iii. Where applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds Maintaining the security of our energy system requires adequate infrastructure and diversity of supply. This must be achieved in the most cost-effective manner. Access to suitable financing measures is essential to realising this objective. This plan sets out a number of financing measures relevant and necessary to furthering our climate and energy goals   139 including the support schemes for electricity and heat. These will impact positively on security of supply.  One of the key financing measures regarding security of supply is the EU Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) funding. Ireland has benefitted significantly from access to CEF funding. Ireland will work closely with the EU to avail of CEF funding and other EU funding support, without which projects would not be completed. The CEF established under Regulation (EU) No. 1316/2013, is a key EU funding instrument for targeted infrastructure investment at European level. Its aim is to accelerate investment in the field of trans-European networks, supporting the development of high performing, sustainable and efficiently interconnected networks in the fields of transport, energy and digital services. EU energy Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) are eligible to apply for CEF funding for works or studies, providing they satisfy certain criteria set out in both the PCI and CEF Regulations. While a PCI is eligible to apply for funding under CEF, it is not guaranteed. In general, projects that are commercially viable would not receive funding under CEF. CEF funding is only allowable for a maximum of 50% of the project costs, if recommended.  It is vital that access to this funding would continue to be available to Irish projects when the UK becomes a third country. Applications by gas infrastructure projects for EU connecting Europe Facility (CEF) funding will be considered in the context of national and EU climate policy objectives. Project promoters may also avail of European Investment Bank (EIB) funding opportunities to support projects. The EIB offers financial support to projects through innovative financial instruments such as guarantees and project bonds. These instruments create significant leverage in their use of EU budget and act as a catalyst to attract further funding from the private sector and other public sector actors. Regulated assets can also be funded by tariff related expenditure, which is subject to the  3.4. Dimension Internal Energy Market  3.4.1. Electricity Infrastructure i. Policies and measures to achieve the targeted level of interconnectivity as set out in point (d) of Article 4 -western edge of mainland Europe presents obvious challenges to interconnection, not least in the area of costs, yet may also highlight the desirability of interconnection, particularly in the context of security and diversification of regulator.