3.2. Dimension Energy Efficiency Long Term Renovation Strategy (2017) and National Development Plan (2018) set out the policies, measures and programmes that Ireland is already undertaking, developing and considering to achieve energy efficiency and climate objectives.   set out in the Climate Action Plan (2019) which will intensify effort and investment aiming for Ireland to deliver primary energy savings of 62,171GWh by 2030. This new indicative national energy efficiency contribution for 2030 represents a substantial intensification over and above the significant scale of effort already in place (with the scale previously in place projected to deliver 16% energy efficiency improvement by end 2020).  The target for energy efficiency savings to be pursued in Ireland is based on the continuation of measures already in place, upscaling and adding to those measures based on the approach and level of investment set out in the National Development Plan together with the actions and intensifications outlined in the Climate Action Plan. This level of achievement will be a significant challenge for Ireland. The key measures in each sector are set out in the Climate Action Plan.    126 Planned policies, measures and programmes to achieve the indicative national energy efficiency contributions for 2030 as well as other objectives referred to in point 2.2, including planned measures and instruments (also of a financial nature) to promote the energy performance of buildings, in particular with regard to the following: i. Energy efficiency obligation schemes and alternative policy measures under Articles 7a and 7b and Article 20(6) of Directive 2012/27/EU and to be prepared in accordance with Annex III to this Regulation Ireland currently intends to deliver the energy savings required by Article 7 of the Directive 2012/27/EU through a combination of an obligation scheme on energy suppliers and distributors and a range of alternative measures. This is subject to ongoing consultation. Applying the annual savings rate (0.8%) from Article 7(1)(b ) target will be approximately 5,180ktoe over the period 2021-2030. The estimated level of savings and the planned approach for meeting the target are provided in the voluntary guiding template under Directive 2012/27/EU.  ii. Long-term renovation strategy to support the renovation of the national stock of residential and non-residential buildings, both public and private, including policies, measures and actions to stimulate cost-effective deep renovation and policies and actions to target the worst performing segments of the national building stock, in accordance with Article 2a of Directive 2010/31/EU Under the 2017 Long Term Renovation Strategy (LTRS) Ireland already has a number of supports in place to encourage retrofitting of homes, businesses and public sector buildings. These supports have resulted in 400,000 homes being upgraded as well as thousands of community and commercial buildings. The majority of these upgrades have been shallower measures. Pilot schemes investigating the challenges and opportunities of deeper retrofit have also been rolled out and the leanings from the schemes have informed the approach to fulfil the level of retrofitting set out in the Climate Action Plan and this Plan.  Existing Measures  Residential  Better Energy Programme  a number of grants are available for energy efficiency upgrades and renewable energy systems. The amount of support available depends community buildings   127  Home Renovation Incentive  a tax relief on renovation measures in homes which was in place until end 2018. This could be claimed for a range of renovation measures including energy efficiency upgrades   Social Housing Retrofit Programme  the social housing stock is undergoing a programme of energy efficiency renovation Commercial  LIEN (Large Industry Energy Network)  A network of larger energy users that enables them to share best practice, improve energy management and energy efficiency  EXEED (Excellence in Energy Efficient Design)  support programme with certification option to help businesses, both public and private, improve energy efficiency, and to embed energy efficient design thinking that will continue to benefit the organisation. The process encourages businesses or organisations to look at projects from the design stage, and consider most efficient process when commissioning or designing a new project, process or asset, thereby helping businesses to become more efficient, competitive and resilient  ACA - The Accelerated Capital Allowance (ACA) is tax incentive operated by Revenue which encourages businesses to upgrade to the most energy efficiency equipment  Public Sector  Detailed in section (iii, and iv) Cross Sectoral  Energy Efficiency Obligation Scheme (2014-2020) Ireland has established an obligation scheme under Article 7 of the Energy Efficiency Directive. The scheme obligates larger energy suppliers to achieve energy savings among end users  Planned Measures The new (2020) LTRS will further reflect the commitments in the National Development Plan and the actions set out in the Irish Governm For 2030 these include:  500,000 homes retrofitted to a B2 Building Energy Rating or cost optimal or carbon equivalent by 2030  Public sector buildings to have a B Building Energy Rating by 2030   128  One third of all commercial buildings to have a B Building Energy Rating or achieve carbon equivalent gains by 2030 These targets will be met through building on the existing approach with a set of new actions that will drive achievement of the targets: New Delivery Structure for Retrofitting:  To achieve the levels of retrofit required to reduce emissions from the Built Environment a new retrofitting delivery model is being developed. The model will group retrofits together to achieve economies of scale, leverage private finance, and ensure easy pay-back methods for homeowners  To begin with a defined area of social housing will be identified as the core of a pilot approach, and will seek to include private households to make greater use of non-Exchequer funds. This approach will be trialled in the Midlands in 2020   Area based, scaled approaches can make it easier to inform and engage the homeowners being targeted by building on existing community structures and programmes. They can also build the confidence of supply chains, which will need to invest in both competency and capacity as we fulfil our national ambition on the decarbonisation of our built environment  The Department of Communications, Climate Action and Environment and SEAI will identify a delivery structure and funding options for an area based residential retrofit programme in early 2020 Building Standards, Retrofitting and Energy Efficiency:  500,000 homes to be retrofitted to a B2 Building Energy Rating or cost optimal.   Local Authorities will upgrade their housing stock under Phase 2 of the social housing retrofit programme to bring dwellings more than 40 years old (30% of the social housing stock) to a B2 equivalent BER  The Public Sector Energy Efficiency Strategy and its associated support programme are designed to assist public bodies in achieving the national energy efficiency targets of 33% 2020, and 50% by 2030.  The Excellence in Energy Efficient Design (EXEED) programme will help commercial buildings and businesses embed energy efficiency measures in the design of their projects, processes, and assets   129  Scale-up and improve the Sustainable Energy Communities and Better Energy Communities programme and enlist a wider range of organisations to anchor its collective approach. This will be done through developing new partners, creating more visibility within communities, and attracting matching finance  Develop the necessary supply chain, including working with Regional Skills Fora to train skilled workers Smart Finance:  Develop a smart finance initiative to provide a competitive funding offer with State support. A guarantee-based product will offer both a degree of risk-sharing to lenders, and an additional leverage effect, which means that the funding is used in a more efficient way  Expand salary incentive schemes within existing SEAI programmes, including setting up public and private sector pioneer programmes for these models and consider  iii. Description of policy and measures to promote energy services in the public sector and measures to remove regulatory and non-regulatory barriers that impede the uptake of energy performance contracting and other energy efficiency service models In 2009, the Government set a national target to improve energy efficiency by 20% by 2020 and at that time set the public sector the more challenging target of improving its energy efficiency by 33%. Since 2009 the public sector has improved its energy efficiency by 27%. To ensure that the public sector fully realise its targets the Government introduced a new Public Sector Energy Efficiency Strategy in January 2017. The Strategy underlines the importance of:  the public sector demonstrating strong leadership on energy efficiency and of   all Government Departments and the bodies under their aegis embedding efficient energy management at all levels of their business operations A crucial provision of the new Strategy was the putting in place of a new Governance structure which includes assigning the role of Energy Performance Officer (EPO) to a member of the senior management in each public sector body. The EPO is accountable for energy management and performance and should oversee and be responsible for achievement of the energy goals in that body. S/he is expected to assign clear implementation responsibility to ensure targets are met. Since the strategy was introduced in   130 2017 the levels of energy efficiency achieved by the sector as a whole has increased steadily in each of the 2 subsequent measured years. The efficiencies achieved and progress made by each public body are tracked anitoring and Reporting system. All Public sector bodies report their data into this system which provides a solid evidence base to measure and manage progress. The scale of progress is reported annually in the Annual Report on Public Sector Energy Efficiency performance.  The Climate Action Plan sets a renewed ambition for the public sector  with a new 50% The Plan sets out actions to enable public bodies to go beyond shaping the policy framework and act as exemplars of best practice in taking climate action across all sectors and use their capacities to lead a wider transition iv. Other planned policies, measures and programmes to achieve the indicative national energy efficiency contributions for 2030 as well as other objectives referred to in point 2.2 (for example measures to promote the exemplary role of public buildings and energy-efficient public procurement, measures to promote energy audits and energy management systems, consumer information and training measures, and other measures to promote energy efficiency  Existing Measures  SEAI have established a Behavioural Economics Unit which is focused on encouraging measurable changes to homeowners' and businesses' energy behaviour, using the latest evidence from Behavioural Science and Economics; their work also helps inform policies through SEAI  SEAI engages frequently with consumers and business and carries out regular surveys of attitudes towards and perspectives on energy efficiency  fficiency for consumers and businesses;  For businesses, SEAI provide a range of guidance and supports. These include: - o Online guidance and information including guidance on energy audits for identifying energy efficiency opportunities o classroom based energy management training for companies  o Audits  For larger enterprises SEAI operate an Energy Audit Scheme which helps larger enterprises comply with their obligations under Article 8 of the Energy Efficiency Directive    131  em provides homeowners with information on the efficiency of their home as well as guidance on the steps they can take to reduce their energy usage and their costs  Government has also funded the rollout of Home Energy Savings Kits across libraries, where individuals can borrow a kit of practical tools that will help them to understand their energy usage and take steps to become more efficient  Schools Education programme is a collaboration between the Department of Education & Skills (DES) and the Department of Communications Climate Action & Environment through the SEAI to improve buildings energy efficiency in schools including fabric retrofit. Operating since 2017 in support of the Public Sector Energy Efficiency Strategy, this pathfinder programme has developed and continues to refine a retrofit approach that can be scaled up and rolled out to schools across Ireland when resources allow  The Central Government Retrofit Programme, introduced in 2017, is another partnership pathfinder retrofit programme between the Office of Public Works (OPW) and SEAI for Central Government, and other OPW estate, buildings within the OPW building portfolio. approaches and build capacity for a large-scale energy retrofit programme for the wider public sector  The OPW run a state-wide staff energy conservation campaign, entitled Optimising Power @ Work which operates in Central Government buildings. The core principle of the campaign is to intensively work and engage with staff to encourage behavioural change on energy use and to identify and eliminate energy waste. Participating buildings can achieve average annual energy savings of 20%   A for investments and increase the up-take of energy efficiency measures by factoring the cost of carbon into decision-making   More stringent building regulations are in force since November 2019, with all new buildings to be Nearly Zero Energy Building (NZEB) and existing dwellings undergoing major renovations (more than 25% of the building envelope) to meet cost optimal performance equivalent to a BER of B2     132 Planned Measures  Market Signals:  Smart-ready electricity meters will be installed in every house by 2024 under the Smart Metering Programme. This will facilitate consumers in improving energy efficiency Regulation of New Buildings and Renovations:  These will be progressively extended to improve energy efficiency performance, including to phase out the installation of oil boilers  Examine ways in which audits for commercial buildings can be further progressed through the use of existing policy levers  At least 40% of all new homes nationally will be delivered within the built-up footprint of existing settlements under our commitment to promote compact and sustainable growth of our cities, towns, and villages. Better spatial planning will reduce the carbon emissions of new developments, and deliver a better quality of life, including shorter commute times, better connections between our places of work and homes, and more vibrant, people-focused environments. Concrete actions to make this a reality include the Land Development Agency aggregating sites, pre-planning of transport, and ensuring that our education and health needs are met District Heating:  Develop a national policy framework for district heating, which covers the key areas of regulation, planning, financing and research  Use the two district heating pilot schemes to develop experience and knowledge that can promote and inform further schemes nationwide to facilitate greater uptake of district heating through self-financed heat networks Commercial Sector:  As part of a suite of supports for business, SEAI has developed an interactive Online Training Platform to facilitate all businesses to access free, high-quality energy related training. This will consist of short online modules, and includes sector specific courses allowing businesses to certify their staff as having completed energy related training   133 v. Where applicable, a description of policies and measures to promote the role of local renewable energy communities in contributing to the implementation of policies and measures in points i, ii, iii and iv Measures in Place The Government funds a Sustainable Energy Communities network which has been a significant success in encouraging local actors to work together. It is underpinned by SEAI mentors and grants to develop a Local Energy Master Plan. The process and mentoring supports available should enable the community group to apply for grant funding to carry out the projects identified in their Plan. The Better Energy Communities (BEC) Scheme provides funding for community groups to improve the efficiency and the sustainability of energy use in their local areas. The aim of the scheme is to support projects at a community level, specifically seeking to test innovative and pioneering partnerships for delivery between the public and private sectors, residential and non-residential sectors, and commercial and not-for-profit organisations. The scheme is part of the national retrofit programme which provides funding to upgrade Ireland's building stock and facilities to high standards of energy efficiency, thereby reducing fossil fuel use, running costs and greenhouse gas emissions.  Since 2012, the BEC Scheme has supported delivery of over 400 community energy efficiency projects. As a result almost 18,000 homes, and over 2,500 community, public and private buildings have been upgraded to end 2019  from community centres, to sports clubs, schools, retail, religious and cultural centres. Government, through SEAI has provided grants of 370m total investment in communities across the country, achieving energy savings of over 900GWh. This success has been achieved through SEAI engagement with Lead Applicants and Project Co-ordinators and the projects they delivered have increased each year in scale, complexity and ambition, with total approximately 9. Planned Measures The Climate Action Plan sets out a number of actions to support communities to take local action by linking to existing and new networks and clustering initiatives. The Climate Action Regional Offices will lead a step-up in climate action within Local Authorities. A number of measures in the Climate Action Plan focus on building awareness in local communities of their energy use and how to reduce it. The Climate Action Plan aims to expand the SEC Network to 1500 communities all over Ireland receiving support to plan for a sustainable energy future.   134 vi. Description of measures to develop measures to utilise energy efficiency potentials of gas and electricity infrastructure The generation of electicity using peat and coal is being phased out. This generation will be replaced by a combination of renewable energy, interconnection imports and, in the short to medium term, by generation from natural gas. Electricity is produced from natural gas at an efficiency of circa 50% on average in Ireland compared to 30-35% for peat and coal. The move from high-carbon solid fossil fuels to natural gas utilising the available capacity in the gas network will lead to a significant increase in efficiency.  vii. Regional co-operation in this area, where applicable The policies listed in this section and section 3.4.4 apply nationally. The mainstream grant schemes, programmes and other supports are administered centrally and are available nationwide. viii. Financing measures, including Union support and the use of Union funds, in the area at national level  The National Development Plan has i to fund energy efficiency improvements across the residential and public sector  tonne by 2030. The Government has also stated that all revenues raised by the increases in carbon tax will be ring-fenced to support climate action and protect those most vulnerable. Over the next decade this  to be used in this way  Ireland is using European Regional Development funding to co-fund the energy Operational Programme 2014-2020  Ireland is exploring the use of EIB funding opportunities to support retrofitting projects under the Smart Finance for Smart Buildings Initiative  The TAMS II Schemes provides grant aid for a number of investments specifically aimed at improving energy efficiency in the farming sector. These include Plate coolers, Heat Transfer Units and Internal Ice Builders for the Dairy Sector.  The Pigs and Poultry Scheme and the Young Farmer Capital Investment Scheme provides grant aid for biomass boilers, electrical heat pads, energy efficient LED lighting, indirect heating systems, solar panels for water heating and electricity   135 production, ventilation fans and control systems, insulation for doors, roofs and walls, air source heat pumps and heat recovery units  Solar PV Installation on farms were provided for, on a pilot basis, with effect from April 2019 under tranche 14. Grant aid in the pilot phase will be available for 40% or of up to 60% in the case of qualified young farmers to fund the cost of a solar system of 6kWp  EU support under the Structural Reform Support Service (SRSS) is being availed of by Ireland to help develop a framework for implementing a comprehensive building upgrade programme for the public sector  in support of the public sector building retrofit and energy efficiency targets  ELENA support is being County Council as lead partner with the Road Management Office) in support of the national public lighting upgrade project