INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 92   2.3 Dimension energy security  In addition to discussing the security of gas supply from third countries, this section will also cover the security of the electricity system, insofar as a discussion of the security of the overall energy system must also give consideration to the security of supply to consumers, as well as certain aspects specific to Italy: on the one hand, the two systems are strongly interdependent, and will only become more interdependent in the future, as electricity production is primarily ensured by renewable sources and gas, with a minor contribution from coal; on the other hand, as mentioned previously, the government plans to phase-out the use of coal for electricity production by 2025.  Security of energy supply will be ensured by diversifying the LNG supply routes and above all by reducing energy imports, as a result of the strong development of renewable sources and increased energy efficiency. i. The elements set out in Article 4(c)  National targets: 1. increasing the diversification of energy sources and supply thereof from third countries, with a view to reducing energy import dependency, 2. increasing the flexibility of the national energy system; 3. addressing constrained or interrupted supply of an energy source, for the purpose of improving the resilience of regional and national energy systems, including a timeframe for when the objectives should be met; Gas sector From the scenarios considered, a demand of 49 Mtoe of natural gas (approximately 60 GSm3) is projected for 2030, with a peak for inland consumption in 2025 caused by the elimination of coal from the electricity generation mix. To this should be added the volume of biomethane intended for the transport sector, currently quantified at approximately 1 GSm3 under the current system of obligations on biofuels, but which could make a further contribution as a source of renewable gas in all final uses, including electricity generation. The gas system will thus be of vital importance for the national energy system, with the -gas energy system, including in light of the development of renewable gas (biomethane, hydrogen and synthetic methane) and the drive to boost the use of alternative fuels in the transport sector. This central role of gas in the energy system will be ensured without developing new major infrastructure, apart from that already being built or currently planned.   The Italian gas system, whgas pipelines that currently cross Europe (Russian gas and North Sea gas), is well known to have gas trade prices higher than those at the main European hubs. The reason for this spread is that the Italian market is still not fully integrated with the more liquid markets in northern Europe, to which it is connected through the Swiss Transitgas pipeline, the short-term transport capacity management of which is non-compliant with European rules, meaning that shippers are unable to balance the prices between the two markets daily. This situation has now deteriorated considerably as a result of the closure of one of the two gas pipelines INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 93   making up the TENP transport system in Germany, which connects the Swiss Transitgas pipeline to northern Europe.  Under normal circumstances, this would only result in a higher energy cost in Italy, but, under particular cyclical conditions, there is a risk that the system may experience a supply crisis. With regard to supply standards, therefore, recent analyses carried out by the Ministry of Economic Development following changes to the general framework last winter (2017/2018) have highlighted a number of critical issues in terms of meeting demand in the scenarios identified by the Regulation itself.  When evaluating infrastructural measures, Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 imposed the obligation on Member States to adopt the necessary measures to meet the maximum daily gas demand, even if the flow from the main gas supply infrastructure for the country, namely  1   The results of the N  1 formula in the most recent risk analysis document submitted by Italy to the European Commission in 2017 contain a value that is very close to the minimum threshold below which the infrastructural standard of the country is deemed inadequate to ensure the necessary levels of security for the country. This result is caused by both the increase in peak gas demand recorded over the last few years and, above all, the decrease in flows, already recorded or legitimately foreseeable, from certain important import gas pipelines in operation, caused by technical issues linked to the functionality of the gas pipeline and the decrease in volumes of import contracts being renegotiated with Algeria.  The most detailed current simulations, relating to what might happen in the event of the main source of supply being interrupted in coming winters, highlight risks for the system, which, in certain scenarios, might be unable to meet gas demand for connected users.  The results of the simulations show a less than optimum supply situation for natural gas in Italy in the event of periods of crisis that might occur in coming winters, a situation that will be brought back in line with the minimum threshold value by optimising entry flows.  In the gas sector, the main objective is to ensure that the overall system is more secure, flexible and resilient and able to deal with a market situation that is, by nature, increasingly uncertain and volatile, as well as supporting the robust development of non-programmable renewable sources, by ensuring that energy demand is met, above all in relation to peaks in demand that coincide with low production levels from renewable sources.  These objectives may be achieved by: - increasing the diversification of sources of supply, by optimising the use of existing infrastructure and developing the LNG market and increasing the growing share of renewable gas (biomethane, synthetic methane and, eventually, hydrogen) in the network; - improving the flexibility of the national system with respect to sources of supply by means of updating the gas transport network, including for the purpose of increasing its security and control standards, in accordance with the provisions of the 10-year development plans for transport companies; - improving the security margin in the event of large peaks in demand; - coordinating the national emergency plans with those of the other countries along the same physical supply corridors, as provided for by European Regulation 2017/1938 on the INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 94   security of the gas system, by additionally establishing possible solidarity measures between Member States.  Oil products sector Although oil products are characterised by decreasing demand towards 2030, they still represent 31% of total domestic energy demand, particularly in the transport and petrochemical sectors. On the path towards economic models for development based on renewable sources, it is noted that even the refining sector may make a positive contribution to the transition towards an economy with a smaller carbon footprint, given a high degree of specialisation, cutting-edge production processes and a continuous, strong commitment in terms of research and development. Oil products still constitute a raw material, even for what is known as green chemistry, as well as for the production of plastics, synthetic rubbers and fibres, detergents and other mass consumer goods. Over the last few years, oil products have met approximately 90% of the demand for raw petrochemical materials, followed by gas and solids, to a negligible extent. The most important supplies from foreign countries are oil and refined products. The majority of the supplies originate from countries with high geopolitical risk profiles; in order to counteract this unfavourable situation, a significant diversification of suppliers was initially established (Algeria, Libya, Iran, Russia) and continues today (for example Azerbaijan, Qatar, the USA, Canada). The issue surrounding the dependency on some of these supplies, in particular with regard to aviation fuels, which might be susceptible to price pressures, still remains. According to the methodology of the International Energy Agency, Italian stocks of crude oil and oil products in 2018 amount to 130 days of imports, corresponding to 90 days of net imports according to current European legislation. Italy has developed an efficient stock system, the management of which is entrusted to the Single Buyer (OCSIT), operating under the supervision of the Ministry of Economic Development, with the obligation to acquire the equivalent of 30 days of security stocks, on behalf of the State, by 2022. OCSIT, which operates on a not-for-profit basis with costs being borne by oil companies on the basis of their in-put for consumption to the national market, operates by buying, selling and maintaining stocks of the main oil products in Italy. Since it commenced operations in 2014, OCSIT has acquired, through public procurement procedures, the equivalent of 12 days of stocks, and will continue its operations by accelerating the timeframe for acquiring stocks in order to profit from the current low price level for oil products The refining crisis in Italy has resulted in the reconversion of five important refineries: Mantua, Rome and Cremona have been reconverted into logistics centres, whereas Marghera has been reconverted into a biorefinery and Gela is nearing the conclusion of its reconversion process, with a view to the production of advanced biofuels, a sector where Italy boasts a significant technological leadership position.  Electricity sector The national objectives in the context of energy security for the electricity sector are broken down into infrastructure objectives, which aim to increase the security of supply in various projected situations, in line with the ENTSO-E scenarios and with the projections of the TSO, and management/organisational objectives, which aim to bring about the necessary legislation allowing the barriers and restrictions that hinder the implementation of the INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 95   aforementioned measures to be eliminated, and in order to target investments towards the general objectives of the Plan, in accordance with cost/benefit efficiency criteria.  The development of interconnections with other networks and solutions designed to create synergies with the gas sector (sector coupling), in a context involving far-reaching changes to the European market, addresses the need to better tackle the issues of system reliability in terms of suitability and flexibility, as well as the need to widen the dimension of the market itself and reduce the price gap.  -west and north-east borders of the country, complemented by additional connections with Greece and, since November 2019, with Montenegro.  The interconnections along these borders will be further enhanced (cf. section 2.4.1) in order to contribute towards the attainment of the targets identified by the Energy Union, in line with a cost-benefit approach and with priority being given to connections with systems having highly developed renewable energies and/or able to contribute towards reducing domestic prices. The development of network projects is provided for in the development plans as approved by the Ministry of Economic Development, subject to the opinion of the regulator, which is conducting a public consultation, and submitted for the strategic environmental assessment (SEA) procedure.  Internally, the new generation system will be characterised by strong growth in non-programmable and small-scale renewables, with increasing network management complexity and a similarly increasing demand for flexibility for balancing purposes. Even considering the possibility that infrastructural assets and the very design of the market may change over time, today the scenarios for strong growth of renewable production are technically sustainable in conditions of security, provided that the works to develop the -existing line sections) are carried out in parallel, in order to manage the effects resulting from changes to the production mix, including the process for the phase-out of coal, and to increase cross-zonal transport capacity. According to technical analyses, in addition to the works already planned, the issue of congestion requires further development of the transmission network for a 1000 MW increase along the Adriatic coast.  The creation of a vast storage capacity, and storage solutions that envisage the use of alternative forms of energy (hydrogen/synthetic methane), both concentrated on network service and distributed, is just as vital in order to offset certain critical issues and to make sufficient flexibilities available.  A key objective will be to maintain appropriate system conditions, including in the mid-long term, and above all in a scenario involving significant changes to the domestic and European generation mix and to the array of potential (demand response; storage technologies) and available resources; this objective calls for appropriate intervention mechanisms, primarily identified, at this stage, to be the new mechanism for remunerating capacity. In addition, the measures aimed at ensuring the widest possible participation in the services market of all resources that may contribute towards security are pursuing the same objectives.  With a time scale fixed for 2030, a series of objectives, as described below, should be identified for each area of intervention. A summary of the objectives, as well as the quantitative aspects thereof, will be provided at the end of the section, in order that each INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 96   objective may be linked to the detailed measures associated therewith, as described in section 3.3.  ii. National objectives with regard to increasing the diversification of sources and associated supply from third countries for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems Gas sector In consideration of the fact that gas will continue to perform an essential function for industrial and domestic uses (in addition to transport) and, above all, for electricity generation in the short-mid term, in conjunction with renewable sources, particular focus will still be placed on diversifying the sources of supply.  The majority of gas supplies currently originates from countries with high geopolitical risk profiles; in order to counteract this unfavourable situation, attempts have already been undergoing for a number of years to diversify non-European suppliers (Algeria, Libya, Qatar, Russia), and attempts are still actively being made in this respect (e.g. Azerbaijan, and the USA and Canada for LNG).  With regard to the objective of diversifying import capacity, work is in progress on the following aspects: - optimising the use of LNG import capacity in existing terminals, maintaining the capacity of which will continue to play a strategic role, Mediterranean and global LNG market, in competition with terminals in northern Europe; - opening up the southern corridor by way of the TAP (Trans Adriatic Pipeline), which will be operational in a very short timeframe (by 2020), enabling the import of approximately 8.8 billion m3 of Azerbaijani gas per year to Italy, with a potential growth in capacity of more than 10 billion m3 per year, which can be achieved without the need for any new infrastructural measures on its Italian section, for which the capacity bidding process for phase 2 is under way; - EastMed project: although the project will allow further diversification of the current routes from 2025 onwards (throughout the EU, Italy is the country with the greatest diversification of its sources), it might not be a priority, given that the decarbonisation scenarios may be achieved through pre-existing infrastructure and the aforementioned TAP. Encouraging the production of renewable gas to inject to the network and, in future, to adopt for all final uses, including electricity generation, also seems useful.   INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 97   Electricity sector The main objective is to implement new market instruments, in order to channel investments towards new storage systems and generation capacity and to promote (as in the case of the market for network services) a progressively more active role for demand and other resources that can support adequacy, on the basis of pre-established standards. This will be achieved through the new capacity market, launched in late 2019, by emphasising technologically advanced solutions having a low environmental impact, in line with the general objectives of the Plan in terms of decarbonisation, and through the requirements arising from the penetration of non-programmable renewables. In this context, and in line with the positions that emerged from the public consultation, the possibility for the operators of small installations operating as groups to participate in non-programmable RES balancing services will also be assessed. In an electrical system fed by an energy mix where the renewable energy share is projected to grow considerably, the generating costs structure will tend to tip over towards fixed costs, including for conventional installations required to work for less hours per year compared with the design standards. Therefore, market mechanisms based on capacity, which are indispensable in terms of security and adequacy, may even have positive effects on network services costs and wholesale prices in the mid-long term.  In this respect, it should also be mentioned that, amongst the various coordinated actions carried out by European countries, provision is also made for a different approach to the issues of adequacy and security, which is no longer solely delegated to individual states, but is to be assessed as a whole, without prejudice to the responsibilities of individual countries. In this respect, Regulation (EC) No 714/2009, recently amended with the adoption of Regulation 2019/943 of 5 June 2019 (the Electricity Regulation), establishes that it is up to the ENTSO for Electricity to draft general adequacy and security scenarios (half-yearly and mid-term outlooks), with the individual operators of each country thus being tasked with working out the details and specifics of each system. In the most recent mid-term adequacy outlook (mid-term adequacy forecast  2019), the ENTSO for Electricity highlighted critical issues for Italy as early as in the short-term (2021) in specific areas (Sicily) and, even more seriously, in the mid-term (2025) throughout the central north of Italy and the larger islands. This is not a new phenomenon, insofar as Italy has for a number of years now experienced a decrease in the operational reserve margin, particularly in the central north of the country, as a result of reduced thermoelectric capacity in periods of particular stress (typically peaks in consumption during the summer and winter, coinciding with problems resulting from the unavailability of installations in interconnected countries, and resulting reductions in the external balance). The analyses carried out by Terna and included in the adequacy report, highlighted that, in an inertia scenario, and certainly by 2025, the thresholds of the two indexes, LOLE (Loss of Load Expectations, which represents the number of hours per year in which demand exceeds available resources, including imports) and ENS (Expected Energy Not Served, which represents the surplus demand with respect to available resources, measured in terms of energy), would not be met. As regards this last topic, the Italian Government has set the LOLE value as 3h/year.  In consideration of the above, the Italian government  just like the governments of many other European countries  deemed it necessary to equip the system with instruments able to ensure, in the mid-long term, the availability of the necessary capacity to meet the adequacy requirements of the Italian electrical system. At the same time, they should promote the development of new efficient and environmentally sustainable capacity. To this end, the rules governing the capacity market have been integrated with the projected emissions limits for CO2 per unit of energy delivered to promote, as of now, installations having a low environmental impact (in addition to active demand and renewables), excluding INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 98   coal-fired installations. In so doing, Italy has anticipated the provisions of Regulation (EU) 943/2019 and ensured that the new instrument serves the transition towards the decarbonisation objectives for electricity production. The system was launched with the auctions for 2022 and 2023.  The consolidation of the system with regard to adequacy through mechanisms to remunerate capacity will result in a different cost structure for the system, with a cost for remunerating power that will be balanced, in terms of benefits, by limitations on supply for those installations and resources that adhere to the new system and, therefore, by the calming effect on prices on the energy and services markets; there will also be significant benefits in terms of increased security, in respect of which the strengthening of the reserve margins may gradually reduce the need to implement extraordinary measures in the event of seasonal emergencies, including improvements in terms of interruptibility and the replacement tertiary reserve.  A further objective concerns the major development of storage capacity, which will be -phenomenon of over-generation and to promote the attainment of renewable energy consumption targets. Nowadays, hydroelectric storage systems represent the most mature option of the various storage technologies. The significant penetration of renewables will require, first and foremost, an increased use of pre-existing pumping systems, thanks to planned network upgrades in the north of Italy, in addition to new systems in the same category. Pumping systems are an important resource for adequacy, as well as for the security and flexibility of the system, as they are able to provide maximum available capacity in periods of higher load, which is ensured through the filling of upstream reservoirs as a result of the pumping schedule for these systems in periods of lower load. In addition, over the next few years, it will also be necessary to pursue considerable development of electrochemical storage, both distributed and centralised, guided by a cost reduction curve that will increase the profitability of distributed photovoltaic generation systems with batteries.  Finally, the objective towards an increased resilience of the electrical system will be pursued through actions aimed at reinforcing control systems and networks, by optimising coordination mechanisms between the various competent institutional bodies; this objective will concern improvements to the resilience to periods of stress, the efficacy of emergency response and restoration of service in the event of outages, and the guarantee of safety for all subjects variously involved. The objectives in this regard must necessarily give all due consideration to the transnational aspect of security risks, in light of the growing interconnection of transmission networks, and the resulting need for increased coordination between European countries, including in terms of defining the national plans.  With regard to the security of the electrical system, a national technical forum was set up between ARERA, TSO and DSOs in order to identify the measures needed to increase the resilience of electrical infrastructure in the face of increasingly frequent extreme weather events, which lead to extended service outages throughout the whole of Italy. Providing specific guidelines, the Ministry of Economic Development decided that the authorised distributors and Terna should all submit resilience plans, indicating the areas and lines most at risk, the phenomena that may compromise service, and the measures to avoid or, in any case, reduce the probability and extent of outages. Network operators must also indicate measures, including in coordination with other institutional stakeholders, including the INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 99   Department of Civil Protection, local authorities and prefectures, for restoring service if disruptions occur in conjunction with the event.  By Resolution No 668/2018/R/eel of 18 December 2018, ARERA identified a system of rewards and penalties to incentivise resilience measures.  iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to reducing energy import dependency from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems The objective of increasing energy independence will be pursued primarily through an increased production of renewable energy and energy efficiency, in a manner that will be clarified in the relevant chapters. On the basis of the scenario with targets, energy dependence should decrease from 77.7% in 2016 to approximately 68% in 2030. The resilience of the overall energy system will also be enhanced by ensuring a greater degree of integration of electricity interconnections with other countries (see relevant chapter) and diversifying the sources of supply.  iv. national objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular by means of developing domestic energy sources, demand response and storage The objectives on renewable sources will be pursued primarily through the development of domestic resources, albeit within the framework of exchange with other countries.  The use of demand response and storage facilities in order to improve the flexibility and security of the system (electrical, and, as a result, also gas) is already in the start-up phase. In particular, in applying the principles of law, ARERA defined the criteria by which demand, unauthorised production units (including those powered by non-programmable renewable sources and distributed generation), and storage systems, including electric car batteries, may participate in the dispatching services market. Therefore, pilot projects allowing figures referred to as aggregators to participate in the market by aggregating consumption units, non-relevant production units and relevant production units not yet authorised to participate in the services market, including in mixed configurations (UVAM: authorised mixed virtual units), were launched. Once the trial currently in progress has concluded, these modes of participation in the market will be integrated into the regulatory framework. In this regard, the ARERA is currently reviewing the overall regulatory framework for dispatching, not least in the light of the new EU provisions. The aim is to promote a reorganisation of the ancillary services market and the rules governing imbalances, in such a way as to increase market efficiency; ensure the fullest possible participation of all available resources, with due regard for security constraints; and limit system costs.  Storage facilities will have particular relevance, not just in terms of security and flexibility, but also in order to keep over-generation to a minimum. In this respect, on the basis of the analyses on the scenario with targets and in consideration of the target trajectories for renewables, in addition to an optimum management of pre-existing water storage systems, it is estimated that new storage systems for almost 1,000 MW in production, split between hydroelectric and electrochemical production, will be necessary as early as in the mid-term (around 2023). Preliminary estimates for 2030 indicate that approximately 6,000 MW, split INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 100   between pumping and centralised electrochemical production, in addition to distributed storage facilities (corresponding to about 4,000 MW), will be required, which will also help limit over-generation from renewables to around 1 TWh. To this end, a study was launched to identify sites suitable for new pumping systems based on pre-existing river basins or lakes.  Moreover, these estimates assume the implementation not only of measures for expanding the resources that contribute to the services market, but also works to enhance and upgrade the electrical transmission and distribution network, including both increased meshing, partly with a view towards smart grids, and the installation of apparatus designed to optimally manage energy flows.  In this respect, the network measures and new storage capacity must be programmed in coordination with the measures for developing renewables. The aim is to encourage the siting of installations on the basis of criteria that take into account the availability of resources, suitable sites, and economic constraints and feasibility. A key consideration here is the increased capacity of the system to change energy availability timeframes, as envisaged by the recently approved Electricity Market Regulation and Directive.  In parallel to this, and in consideration of new EU regulations, effective ways of attracting private investments, not just in terms of generation, but also storage facilities, will be identified. Storage solutions envisaging the use of alternative means of delivering energy (e.g. hydrogen) could also be assessed.  Although not an objective in itself, it is worth mentioning that the authorisation procedures relating to the performance of works connected to the above points will be simplified and expedited, with the reference legislation also being updated, if necessary. It will be important, for example, to simplify the authorisation procedures for pumping systems, including for small distributed installations. Alongside pumping and electrochemical storage, the intention is to promote the development of other technologies that enable energy to be stored and/or integrated with other forms. Of these, the various forms of power-to-gas could play a key role, as emerged, for example, from the INECP consultation process. Hydrogen synthesis from excess renewable electricity could be particularly interesting, to be used for storage or injected into the gas network, subject where appropriate to methanisation. An assessment will be made of whether pilot projects to test the functionality, cost-effectiveness and replicability of the various technological solutions should be carried out. The potential of technologies that enable storage in the form of thermal energy, especially HEC and district heating systems, will also be assessed.   In summary, the objectives for the energy security of the electrical system and associated measurements are as follows. - Increased resilience and flexibility of the system, by prioritising the use of technologically advanced solutions for managing and controlling network parameters (frequency, voltage, short-circuit capacity), so as to combine the attainment of the objectives set in the network development plans and the system defence plans with those deriving from the present Plan. - Implementation of capacity market mechanisms, already adopted, to ensure the adequacy of the system in a manner coherent with the decarbonisation targets and with the targets set for the development of renewables and energy efficiency. To this INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 101   end, emissions limits on the CO2 produced have been established; these allow only those installations having a low environmental impact to participate in the capacity market. - For existing pumping systems, expected increased hours of use with respect to current levels of 90% for systems located in northern Italy and of 80% for those located in the south (equating, for both, to over 600 storage hour equivalents). - Installation of new storage systems amounting to at least 6 GW by 2030, mainly to offer network services and located primarily in the south, followed by Sicily and Sardinia, on the market. For these systems  following the establishment of requirements by market area and before launching implementation projects  location criteria will first be established jointly with the Regions. The aim here is in part to avoid negative impacts on the environment, with due regard for the security requirements of the electricity system. At least 50% of the storage power required of the electricity system will be provided by pumping systems, and the remainder by electrochemical storage systems with a capacity/power ratio of about 8 kWh/kW. Sensitivity analyses have shown that, in the event of an increase in photovoltaic capacity (+4 GW) or a distribution of photovoltaic capacity concentrated more in the south (+2 GW) with respect to the scenarios adopted in the Plan, the capacity of the storage systems required could increase by, respectively, 2 GW and 0.5 GW, for a total of 6.5-8 GW. - A high penetration of storage systems coupled with distributed systems (about 4.5 GW) is envisaged, mainly to maximise self-consumption (charging in the central hours of the day and discharging in the evening). - Reduction of over-generation to values of around 1 TWh by 2030, by upgrading the network, introducing new dispatching resources and storage systems and making more use of existing storage systems.  - Encouragement of more pro-active and flexible electricity demand (demand side response) that could be an important resource, as in the case of electric vehicle recharging, for which it is necessary to foster the convergence of demand and supply peaks for non-programmable renewable sources through appropriate technological and market instruments and measures.  - Planning and implementation of developments on the network and associated meshing in line with procedures for planning the development of renewable energy systems, in order to make the transit of energy flows from south to north more efficient. - Increased network resilience, including against extreme weather events, by adopting and implementing specific action plans, starting with higher risk areas, in order to protect continuity of supply and the safety of individuals and property. - Simplification and speeding up of authorisation procedures relating to the performance of works connected to the above points, with improved stakeholder consultation and reporting, and awareness-raising amongst local populations. - Integration of renewable gas sources by using existing gas system infrastructure for transport, storage and distribution.  The energy transition initiated by the INECP, and taken forward in even more radical terms by the long-term strategy, entails a gradual electrification of consumption and an increased share of electricity from renewable sources. However, it will continue to require, including in the medium-long term, an important role for the gas infrastructure. This can indeed play a decisive role to ensure the security and flexibility of the Italian electricity system, to encourage the integration of the new electricity renewables  for example through power-to-gas  and to foster the development, transport and storage of renewable gases such as biomethane and hydrogen. In this scenario, a growing interconnection between the two INTEGRATED NATIONAL ENERGY AND CLIMATE PLAN  December 2019 102   networks and greater convergence between research and development plans is expected, as well as growing synergies in the operational management of the two infrastructures. Certain activities in the electricity-gas coupling sector were already launched in 2019. They include the following.  - electrification of some Italian storage and compression plants, transforming them into gas-electricity dual-fuel installations, reducing emissions, improving performance and, in effect, connecting the networks of the two TSOs to provide flexibility for the electricity system; - a joint study by the two TSOs in line with the national and European strategic guidelines for the energy sector decarbonisation scenarios, as a preliminary step to drafting 10-year electricity transmission and gas transportation network development plans; - from a perspective of joint adequacy of the two systems to address the growing penetration of non-programmable electricity renewables, cooperation on research activities on topics of common interest has been strengthened. These include: the use of programmable renewable sources, infrastructure analysis and monitoring, hydro-geological land analyses, site monitoring, the joint optimisation of electricity and gas networks, cybersecurity and flexibility.   