 and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 124    3.5.i. Strategies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.5  In 2015, the Chamber of Commerce of Luxembourg, IMS Luxembourg and the Ministry of Economic Affairs commissioned the sociologist, economist and journalist Jeremy Rifkin to study the development of a new h aims to identify solutions to the challenges faced by the state and society, and seeks to exploit the collective intelligence of the stakeholders involved, in the form of group intelligence.   The TIR process was therefore conceived as an open, inclusive, collective intelligence-based and future-shaping process, targeting a common ambition to understand an increasingly complex world, to identify megatrends, to draw the necessary conclusions and to bring them into the democratic institutions in an appropriate manner. Last but not least, the TIR process should also break up the traditional silo thinking, which is widespread in both the private and the public sector.   The TIR strategy study, which covers the areas of energy, mobility, buildings, food, industry, finance, smart economy, circular economy and prosumers & social model, was organised in thematic platforms covering the individual areas and involving over 300 participants from business, politics and civil society.   Based on the conclusions of the study, the Government Council decided to use the results as a general guide for the design of national future policy. In the energy and climate field, the Government Council identified as priorities the development of a national energy internet, the promotion of e-mobility, the demonstrate the socio-economic contribution of sustainable neighbourhoods/cities with sustainably constructed healthy buildings that   The above-mentioned priority projects and the approaches outlined in the TIR strategic study, which are based on the significant development of renewable energies and their integration into the energy network, the development of decentralised energy storage, the digitalisation of energy networks, the use of more sustainable means of transport and the energy efficiency of the building stock, are therefore the cornerstones and an appropriate basis for greater prioritisation of research and innovation policy in the field of energy.  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 125    It should be noted in this regard that Luxembourg, as a small country, can of course only make a correspondingly small contribution to the necessary global energy turnaround. On the other hand, the very fact that it is a small country means that Luxembourg has the potential to become a pioneer at country level to illustrate how certain key technologies and innovations associated with the energy transition can be scaled up at country lbecome a pioneer in key technologies and innovation in the energy transition, thereby achieving a transfer value that would be extremely valuable from an international perspective and that would be disproportionately higher than the direct contribution of a small country to the global energy balance. In this sense, and as a consequence of the developments outlined above, Luxembourg will focus on a number of key areas of research and innovation, selected on the basis of the following criteria: (1) they build on existing skills developed in recent years in the Luxembourg research landscape (2) they build on existing infrastructures that Luxembourg has built up in recent years and has already scaled up at country level, and (3) they are suited to ensuring that research competencies combine with infrastructures to form the basis for a workshop for key technologies and innovations for the energy transition. (4) In addition to these more technical innovations, research is also being conducted into spatial planning and socio-political processes of climate-friendly transformation.  As far as existing research competencies are concerned, Luxembourg can build on an internationally highly successful and visible research landscape in the field of computer science, in which energy-related topics well. Following on from these themes, internationally visible HPC infrastructure, which can also handle larger data processing and data modelling projects. Appropriate and successful research stakeholders are also available to shed light on the social aspects of an energy transition.   As far as national, energy-related infrastructure is concerned, the Luxembourg government has launched a whole series of highly relevant initiatives in recent years. For example, electricity and gas system operators were required by law to replace current metering systems with smart meters and to manage the relevant data through a national central system by 2020 and 2021 respectively. Luxembourg is therefore one of the first countries in the world to have comprehensive and integrated smart meters for electricity and gas, with the possibility of extending them to other media such as water and district heating. In  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 126   addition, electricity distribution network operators have also been required by law to set up a common national infrastructure of public recharging points for electric vehicles, which by 2020 foresees a total of 800 recharging points in public spefficiency for buildings, which are highly progressive when compared with those of other countries, are circularity éco-quartiers made in Luxembourg).  The above considerations lead to the conclusion and aspiration that Luxembourg intends to become a pioneer for the successful implementation of a large-scale nationwide energy transition. Sustainable and energy efficient buildings with local flexibility options and/or energy storage capacity, as well as sustainable mobility components (smart grids) will form the main pillars of this system. Sensor technology and data interoperability open up possibilities for overall monitoring and modelling, which in turn can be used to optimise the system components.   Luxembourg will therefore also become a highly attractive location for suppliers and start-ups in the field of smart energy management, which will find an attractive testing and experimentation environment in Luxembourg for the (further) development of their products.  The cross-border dimension of spatial and mobility planning is also particularly important for Luxembourg. More than in other cross-border metropolitan areas (Copenhagen, Basel, Geneva), Luxembourg is a magnet for a border area with three different countries (France, Germany, Belgium) and commuter flows, as well as the cross-border housing and labour market, which is unique in Europe on this scale. For Luxembourg, it is essential to promote research and innovation in this area.  Luxembourg therefore intends, among other things, to continuously increase the volume of investment in research and development in the energy sector and hopes to focus in particular on the following thematic priorities: 1. Sustainable buildings and building materials  energy efficiency and circular economy,  2. Éco-quartiers made in Luxembourg  plus energy systems, car-free mobility, socially inclusive urban planning 3. Integration of renewable energies and e-mobility in digital power networks, energy-internet and sector coupling  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 127   4. Territorial and cross-border transformation processes in the areas of mobility and spatial planning  5.   In order to address the above-mentioned issues in a structured, clustered and targeted way, the above-mentioned thematic areas will be grouped together in a new research infrastructure that is to be established, involving all relevant stakeholders: the University of Luxembourg, the Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST) and the Luxembourg Institute for Socio-Economic Research (LISER), in order to take a mission-based approach to research that will shed light on the social and societal aspects of the over the necessary financing aspect and the indispensable quality control.   As regards innovation, Luxembourg is a strong supporter of sustainable development in economic, environmental and also social terms. Luxembourg is also developing a growing community of clean technology start-ups and SMEs, addressing issues such as energy transition, smart cities, smart mobility rtner for entrepreneurs and to find pragmatic solutions for their innovative business development projects that way through innovation and research. Luxemabove-mentioned enterprises. It encourages and supports companies to innovate and grow, while facilitating collaboration with public research stakeholders. This applies in particular to the area of clean technologies and the transition to a circular economy.   streamlined around the topics of energy system transformation and the associated digitalisation of this sector. It will also seek to improve the attractiveness of international investors, companies and professionals to ensure that companies and activities attracted from outside are compatible with the    Luxembourg is also ho and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 128   which is currently being transformed into a climate bank. In its current legislative programme, the    to its geographic-for energy efficiency, renewable energy and energy infrastructure will be explored and taught, as well as the interfaces with the insurance industry based in Luxembourg.  Further strategies and measures are outlined in Section 3.1.3.ii.     and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 129   Stimulating behavioural changes in lifestyles In addition to the regulatory and financial framework of the state, there is also a need to change lifestyles within society. Climate and energy policies require the participation and acceptance of citizens. In order to achieve a sustainable stimulation of behavioural changes in lifestyles, an attractive environment should be created that motivates permanent changes in everyday routines:   Enhancing public transport and accessibility for all citizens  Promoting the concept of the sharing economy  Encouraging responsible travel and nutrition  Setting an example of climate protection through public institutions  Increasing the supply of alternative means of transport, such as bike sharing, cargobikes, car sharing or carpooling   Cross-border integrative urban (neighbourhood) and spatial planning  neighbourhood administratordecentralised approach to sustainable living and the ecology and circular economy within the neighbourhood through, for example, the promotion of the sharing economy and urban farming projects, the organisation of an exchange platform or a repair café.  3.5.ii. Any regional cooperation with other Member States in this area; this includes any information on how the objectives and policies of the SET-Plan are applied to national situations. The steps and institutional developments mentioned in the previous sections will be further developed in cooperation with other European research and innovation institutions. European programmes are particularly appropriate here, as well as doctoral students, etc. 3.5.iii. Any financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds In recent years, the Luxembourg Government has made considerable efforts to support technological developments and the research and innovation of new technologies. Environmental technologies are among the priorities   and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 130   As provided for in the 2018-2023 government programme, Luxembourg will focus even more in the coming  increased. In addition, the connection between energy and climate policies and the economic development of the country in general should be strengthened. By bringing the national legal framework for the promotion of research, innovation, energy and the environment into line with European State aid guidelines, Luxembourg has already equipped itself with the necessary tools to best assist the private sector in implementing forward-looking innovations. In the future, it will be important to use these instruments in the most targeted way possible in order to ensure the competitiveness of national companies on the one hand and to achieve national climate, energy and environmental goals on the other.   