 and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 47   2.4. Internal energy market dimension 2.4.1. Electricity interconnectivity Luxembourg is almost completely reliant on imports to cover its demand for electricity. A high level of interconnection is therefore essential for Luxembourg and can only be compared to a limited extent with the interconnection levels of other EU Member States. Luxembourg already has interconnection capacities that far exceed the 2030 targets set in the Council Decision of October 2014. In mathematical terms, the (N-0) interconnection level in relation to the annual peak load is currently approximately 270%. With the network expansion projects that are currently planned, this will increase to approximately 400% in 2030 and should therefore offer sufficient reserves to be able to adequately manage future increases in consumption in all areas.  2.4.2. Energy transmission infrastructure In the gas sector, the currently existing transmission system infrastructure is considered sufficient, particularly because peak demand has fallen significantly due to the decommissioning of the TwinErg CCGT power plant. There is no need to further expand cross-border connections. At the same time, the gas market with Belgium, which has been shared since 2015, is to be further enhanced. In the electricity sector, apart from the fact that the Creos public grid is located in the same bidding zone as the German Amprion grid, the integration of Luxembourg into the European electricity grid has been significantly improved by the commissioning of a phase-shifting transformer and the establishment of a permanent line connection between the Luxembourg and Belgian transmission systems. Testing of the phase-shifting transformer has now been completed. Currently, the phase-shifting transformer is used to optimise the load flows in Luxembourg and the surrounding regions. Luxembourg aims to further strengthen this meshed integration over the medium term. Since an increase in the demand for electricity and peak load is expected in Luxembourg, in part due to the expected population increase, diversification of economic activities and general economic growth, it is necessary to expand the existing interconnections. The transmission system operator Creos is therefore planning to convert an existing 220 kV interconnection towards Germany to high-temperature conductors by 2020 and, in the medium to long term, to upgrade/reinforce the 220 kV line towards Germany. There are still no plans to connect the Luxembourg public grid to the French grid.    and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 48   2.4.3. Market integration particularly for the electricity sector. Luxembourg develop a new European market design for the electricity markets. The consistency of electricity market design in the Member States will be of paramount importance here. Separate national routes will only burden the electricity consumers, disregard the impact on other Member States and, at worst, jeopardise security of supply.  In a complete internal electricity market, national borders should no longer pose a challenge to market players. The Luxembourg Government, the regulatory authority ILR and the transmission system operator Creos are actively participating in the further development of the internal electricity market in European bodies and institutions.  Particular importance is attached to cooperation within the framework of the Pentalateral Energy Forum (PLEF), which, in addition to Luxembourg, comprises Belgium, the Netherlands, France, Germany, Austria and Switzerland. This region, which is closely linked from a technical and economic perspective, has been playing a leading role in bringing together the European electricity markets for years. Within the PLEF, the close integration of the electricity markets of Germany and Luxembourg with the cross-border market area once again stands out. Luxembourg aims to maintain this joint market area and further enhance the cooperation.  Luxembourg will investigate whether the conclusion of bilateral agreements with other Member States on mutual solidarity in the event of energy crises could improve security of supply in Luxembourg.  Compared with the rest of Europe, electricity and gas prices for final consumers in Luxembourg are well below the European average. However, the proportion of consumers who change suppliers is relatively low. In this context, it is important to create comparability and transparency. By actively comparing the tariffs of their supplier with those of competitors and changing suppliers if necessary, energy consumers can considerably reduce their energy costs. It is therefore an aim to ensure that the prices are readily comparable and transparent.    and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 49   To improve the involvement of active consumers in the market, whether by decentralised production or by participation in flexibility markets yet to be defined, Luxembourg will convert 95% of its electricity meters to smart meters by 2020.  To improve the market integration of renewable energy, Luxembourg has converted parts of its support system to a sliding market premium. Joint, cross-border calls for tenders for renewable energy with other European countries are also in the planning stage.   In order to minimise the risk of supply bottlenecks in the natural gas sector, as well as to increase security of supply in general and to integrate the markets, Creos merged the two national gas markets to form a single, country-wide market in 2015 in cooperation with the Belgian network operator Fluxys. As part of this consolidation of the market areas, the guaranteed, uninterruptible capacities at the Belgian border were also considerably increased to their maximum technical availability. This significantly increases uninterruptible capacities even without line upgrades and ensures long-term security of supply for Luxembourg.  2.4.4. Energy poverty Luxembourg has a comprehensive strategy for tackling poverty in general (minimum wage, social inclusion income (REVIS), etc.). In addition, there is a series of measures in Luxembourg offering targeted help to people affected by energy poverty.  The amended laws of 1 August 2007 on the organisation of the electricity market and on the organisation of the natural gas market stipulate that household customers who are unable to pay their electricity or gas bills can receive social assistance from the responsible social welfare office.   For its part, the Law of 18 December 2009 on the organisation of social assistance stipulates that, when applying the procedures established in the above-mentioned laws on the organisation of the electricity and natural gas markets, the responsible social welfare office must investigate whether the household customer is able to pay his or her energy bills and is thus entitled to social assistance.   Particular attention must be paid to housing in the fight against energy poverty, as rising housing prices have become a major social challenge in Luxembourg. Low-income population groups can often only have access to poorly maintained rented housing in old buildings with low energy standards. The government is  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 50   therefore targeting the creation of affordable housing. Energy efficiency measures in the housing sector will be designed in a way that simultaneously improves the national energy balance and the living conditions of low-income groups. The government will also work with all relevant stakeholders to develop innovative programmes, as part of the national long-term renovation strategy, which will create incentives to renovate old housing while providing housing for low-income households. It should also be mentioned that there is already a programme in place through the cost-of-living allowance can help those in need to face a possible increase in the cost of housing. It should also be pointed out that the current social assistance legislation stipulates that any person who satisfies the conditions for entitlement to social assistance is entitled, under defined conditions, to a minimum provision for domestic energy if he or she is unable to cover the costs of domestic energy.  The enormous amount of investment in infrastructure development and the introduction of free public transport from 1 March 2020 are certainly not only transport policy measures, but also clearly social measures.   