 and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 116   3.4.  A key building block for the overall strengthening of the European Single Market will be the swift discussed below, but a full recap is not required. 3.4.1. Electricity infrastructure 3.4.1.i. Strategies and measures to achieve the targeted level of interconnectivity as set out in point (d) of Article 4 On account of its high dependency on imports, Luxembourg already has electricity interconnection capacities that are able to sustainably safeguard the security of supply. This can be seen in particular from the high load interconnection rate, which is well above the 2030 objectives set out in the European Council Decision, but is also indispensable for Luxembourg and only comparable to a limited extent with interconnection levels in other EU Member States. While the target size for Member States has recently been increased from 10% to 15%, Luxembourg is already exceeding this many times over with a load interconnection rate of 270% (see also 4.5.1). The level of interconnection will continue to increase until 2030 in line with the planned network expansion projects. Among other things, the transmission system operator, Creos, is actively promoting the reinforcement and upgrading of the high and medium voltage levels to enable and support the transition from fossil fuels to renewable energies. In particular, the aim is to enable the production of electricity (especially wind and photovoltaics) to be continually increased in the north of the country and to allow for high consumption in the centre and south of the country. Due to its dependence on imports, a further expansion of the existing interconnectors is also planned in order to continue to guarantee the security of supply for Luxembourg. For example, the upgrade/reinforcement of the existing 220 kV line towards Germany is already part of the network development plans of both Luxembourg and Germany. The planned network development projects on existing corridors are being implemented in line with the existing procedures and are intended to improve the situation for the population as a whole. In order to ensure the necessary public acceptance, the public will be involved through a broad consultation process.    and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 117   3.4.1.ii. Regional cooperation in this area There will be close cooperation with neighbouring countries for the implementation of cross-border electricity infrastructure projects. In addition to the respective bilateral cooperation, coordination shall also take place at regional level (in particular in the framework of the Pentalateral Forum) and at European level (within the respective ENTSO-E working groups, in particular the Ten Year Network Development Plan). As has already been described in more detail in Section 1.4, the Pentalateral Energy Forum has adopted the common plan to further develop the internal energy market through coordinated activities in the following areas:  Market integration o Electricity market coupling o Implementation of the Clean Energy Package o Redispatching   Flexibility o Demand-side management o Sector coupling and Power-to-X o Role of hydrogen o Role of storage technologies o E-mobility 3.4.1.iii. Any financing measures in this field at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds The electricity infrastructure is financed by corresponding network charges, which are set and monitored by the regulatory authority (Institut Luxembourgeois de Regulation, ILR). Separate funds are available at European level, which can be distributed within the framework of the Projects of Common Interest. However, there are no projects currently planned for Luxembourg that depend on this financing measure.  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 118   The Pentalateral Energy Forum will discuss possible regional approaches to increasing energy efficiency and expanding renewable energies. For example, common approaches could be sought with financial institutions, such as the European Investment Bank, in order to reduce financing risks. 3.4.2. Energy transmission infrastructure 3.4.2.i. Strategies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.4.2, including any specific measures to enable the delivery of Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) and other key infrastructure projects The decommissioning of the TwinErg GuD power plant has considerably reduced the peak demand for gas. Therefore, even in the case of further expansion of biogas plants (see Section 4.4.2), it can be expected that the current and foreseeable supply task can be adequately met by the existing gas infrastructure. Accordingly, no further measures are envisaged for extending the gas infrastructure. The import capacity will be increased by other measures, such as improving the use of these capacities through cross-border cooperation. 3.4.2.ii. Regional cooperation in this area Although no further development activities are foreseen, close cooperation will be pursued with neighbouring countries in order to optimise the use of existing gas infrastructure, particularly in crisis situations. This coordination will take place bilaterally, regionally (especially in the gas platform within the Pentalateral Energy Forum) and at European level (ENTSO-G). 3.4.2.iii. Any financing measures in this field at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds The gas infrastructure is financed by corresponding network charges, which are set and monitored by the regulatory authority (Institut Luxembourgeois de Regulation, ILR). There are no plans at present to use European funds. 3.4.3. Market integration A key building block for the overall strengthening of market integration will be the swift implementation of recap is not required.  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 119   3.4.3.i. Strategies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.4.3 market, it is easier for suppliers active in Luxembourg to access the liquid trading hub at Zeebrugge as well as LNG terminals and gas reservoirs. This promotes competition in the whole of the joint market and offers gas customers high security of supply at more affordable prices. technical perspective due to the construction of a phase-shifting transformer in Schifflange and the integration of the Luxembourg grid interconnection into the European transmission network that this has made technically possible, with permanent connections to Germany and Belgium. Commercialisation of this interconnector is not planned in the short term. However, the issue will be closely monitored in the course of the further development of congestion management (especially in the context of the Capacity  Within the Pentalateral Energy Forum, the close integration of electricity markets in the region will be pioneer that fully exploits the potential of transmission capacity by calculating capacity allocation methods using a flow-based approach. This will further improve market liquidity and ensure efficient congestion management and an overall efficient market on a regional basis. Possibilities for cross-border participation in the capacity markets in France and Belgium are also being discussed. As part of the joint market area with Germany, Luxembourg is actively supporting the coalescence of the electricity markets. For the day-ahead market, the further development of capacity calculation and congestion management in the core region is a top priority. As regards the intraday market, both the active participation in the integrated XBID platform and the harmonisation of the conditions for Luxembourg network users with the German framework conditions (in particular Gate Closure Times) should be mentioned. The same applies to balancing markets: the transmission system operator CREOS is currently investigating ways of opening up access to the German and European balancing market for network customers in Luxembourg. A particular challenge here is posed by the fact that the Creos transmission -frequency control is handled by the German Amprion -electricity balancing markets for Luxembourg network customers offers the potential to stimulate the  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 120   decentralised production of electricity in Luxembourg and to open up new marketing opportunities in the area of demand-side management for household and business customers, as well as the industrial sector. Consequently, Luxembourg is also actively participating in the relevant European balancing reserve platforms (MARI, PICASSO). In this context, reference should also be made to the pumped storage power plant in Vianden, which is directly connected to the German transmission system and provides a significant contribution to the stability of the system and security of supply in the Greater Region (see Section 4.4.1.). Due to the specific configurations of the transmission network operators Creos and Amprion, the extent to which cooperation in the common wholesale price zone should be further regulated by contract, inter alia with a view to dealing with crisis situations, e.g. through contracts between network operators or intergovernmental agreements under Regulation (EU) 2019/941 on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector, is currently being examined. 3.4.3.ii. Measures to increase the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production such as smart grids, aggregation, demand response, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, real-time price signals, including the rollout of intraday market coupling and cross-border balancing markets To enable electricity consumers to actively participate in the market, Luxembourg has legally obliged the network operators to convert at least 95% of all electricity meters to smart meters by the end of 2020. This would create the conditions, in particular, for the introduction of time-variable tariffs.  Smart meters also provide a technical basis for improving transparency, service quality and efficiency, as well as opportunities for innovative energy services. Examples include transparent access to own consumption data, improved market communication processes, activation of flexibility on the consumer side, or more efficient network operation. However, further development of the data infrastructure is necessary in order to take full advantage of these opportunities. A current legislative proposal therefore provides for the development of an energy data platform, in particular to enable access to relevant electricity consumption data for authorised users (i.e. in particular the end consumers themselves), taking into account all aspects of data protection, which must be given high priority at all times. The design phase is scheduled for completion by the end of 2020. Depending on the cost-benefit ratio of the proposed options, the implementation phase will then follow.  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 121   The design of network charges is closely linked to the issue of additional flexibilities and fair allocation of costs in the electricity sector. This is currently being investigated by the Luxembourg regulatory authority, ILR, as part of a study. In this regard, it is also being checked that the applicable rules do not constitute any obstacles to consumers actively participating in the market and that the possibility is open for self-sufficiency with appropriate sharing of the network costs of all consumers. The regulatory authority, ILR, prepares annual reports on the electricity and gas markets. These reports deal, in particular, with the competitive situation on the markets, for example based on the number of suppliers active in Luxembourg and the rates of switching for customers in different segments. ILR also prepares an annual report on whether the prices for supplying electricity and gas are in conformity with the public service obligations (). The implementation of 1 August 2007 reinforces the potential for flexibility of consumers. An amendment to this law, which was introduced in 2018 and, with some adjustments, in 2019, will regulate and also promote own consumption based on renewable energies. Renewable electricity consumed individually or in a community shall be exempted from electricity taxation and network use in terms of consumption volume. Network charges for connection services shall be levied on a cause-related and non-discriminatory basis. These measures create an important condition for easing the burden on the electricity networks and enabling them to operate in a smarter and safer manner. 3.4.3.iii. Measures to ensure priority access and dispatch of electricity from renewable sources or high efficiency cogeneration and avoidance  The revised Law of 1 August 2007 on the organisation of the electricity market guarantees a feed-in priority for renewable energy. It also obliges network operators to minimise security of supply measures restricting the supply of electricity from renewable energy sources. However, the aim is to further integrate renewable energy into the market. In the case of larger plants, the support was changed to a market premium model, which stimulates a more efficient optimisation of use on the basis of efficient price signals.  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 122   3.4.3.iv. Strategies and measures to protect consumers, especially vulnerable and, where applicable, energy-poor consumers, and to improve the competitiveness and contestability of the retail energy market To provide consumers with a clearer overview of electricity and gas tariffs and to evaluate the potential savings of switching suppliers, the regulatory authority runs the comparison portal www.calculix.lu. In its report, the authority also gives recommendations on how to improve the competitive situation on the electricity and gas markets, for example through transparency measures. 3.4.3.v. Description of measures to enable and develop demand response, including those addressing tariffs to support dynamic pricing Corresponding measures have already been described in Section 3.4.3.ii. and are therefore not listed again here. 3.4.4. Energy poverty 3.4.4.i. Any strategies and measures to achieve the objectives set out in point 2.4.4 Low-income sections of the population are being hit particularly hard by climate change and the health impact of fossil energy sources. Climate action therefore also provides a tangible contribution to social justice. However, climate action must also be socially embedded in order to prevent energy poverty.   Luxembourg has a comprehensive strategy for tackling poverty in general (minimum wage, social inclusion income (REVIS), etc.). In addition, there is a series of measures in Luxembourg offering targeted help to people affected by energy poverty. The acts of 1 August 2007 on the organisation of the electricity market and on the organisation of the natural gas market stipulate that household customers who are unable to pay their electricity or gas bills can receive social assistance from the responsible social welfare office. For its part, the act of 18 December 2009 on the organisation of social assistance stipulates that, when applying the procedures established in the above-mentioned acts on the organisation of the electricity and natural gas markets, the responsible social welfare office must investigate whether the household customer is able to pay his or her energy bills and is entitled to social assistance. Particular attention must be paid to tackling energy poverty in the housing sector: in Luxembourg, rising house prices have become a major social challenge. Low-income population groups can often only have access to poorly maintained rented housing in old buildings with low energy standards. The government is  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 123   therefore targeting the creation of affordable housing. Energy efficiency measures in the housing sector will be designed in a way that simultaneously improves the national energy balance and the living conditions of low-income groups.   At the same time, targeted programmes will also be put in place which, in the face of rising CO2 prices, will provide significant financial incentives for homeowners to switch from fossil to renewable energy sources. This change should also be affordable for people on low incomes. Among other thi The government will also work with all relevant stakeholders to develop innovative programmes to provide incentives for the renovation of old housing while providing housing for low-income groups as part of the national long-term renovation strategy to be prepared next year. It should also be mentioned that there is already a programme in place through the cost-of-living allowance  can help those in need to face a possible increase in the cost of housing. It should also be pointed out that the current social assistance legislation stipulates that any person who satisfies the conditions for entitlement to social assistance is entitled, under defined conditions, to a minimum provision for domestic energy if he or she is unable to cover the costs of domestic energy.  The huge volume of investment in infrastructure development and the introduction of free public transport from 2020 are certainly not just transport policy measures, but also clearly social measures.   