 and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 111   3.3.  3.3.i. Strategies and measures related to the elements set out in point 2.3 In order to analyse and ensure the security of supply in the electricity and gas sector, the Luxembourg government draws up reports on this subject every two years. These reports not only consider the balance between supply and demand, but also investigate the extent to which network operators in Luxembourg are making sufficient investments in the maintenance and expansion of their networks. The most recent reports, dating from 2018, clearly show that national electricity and gas infrastructures are in good condition and are as close as possible to the state of the art. The existing gas infrastructure is large enough for the current and foreseeable supply task and, accordingly, no further expansion measures are planned, except for possible densification within the connected municipalities. In the electricity sector, on the other hand, various investment measures are foreseen (see Section 3.4.1). In the context of security of supply in the Greater Region of Luxembourg, the Vianden Pumped Storage Power Plant has an important role to play. Pursuant to Article 7 of Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 of 25 October 2017 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply, Luxembourg is currently also carrying out risk assessments to ensure the security of gas supply. Current analyses indicate that although the security of supply in Luxembourg is highly dependent on neighbouring countries, having neither its own mining operations nor extensive storage capacities, it will be possible to manage disruptions in the majority of the gas infrastructure through demand-side measures. These demand-side measures may be limited to industrial customers, thereby guaranteeing the supply of protected customers. At the same time, it is not possible to rule out negative economic implications in the event of disruptions to network connection points over the longer term.  The widespread installation of smart meters will also make a useful contribution to security of supply. The switching relays of the new smart electricity meters enable grid operators to switch off loads in a targeted manner for system security purposes. National law provides for a smart meter rollout of 95% in the electricity sector and 90% in the gas sector by the end of 2020. Regular stocktaking indicates that implementation is on schedule, which is also backed up by current statements from the distribution network operators. There is currently a debate about the extent to which these technical possibilities should be flanked by an expanded regulatory framework. Work is also under way to establish how further use can be made of these technical possibilities through an energy data platform.  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 112   In addition to the above, it should also be noted that the implementation of the Clean Energy Package in the revised Electricity Market Organisation Act of 1 August 2007 will further increase cross-border competition between suppliers, which in turn has a positive impact on security of supply. With regard to the oil sector, the measures set out in Section 3.1.3 aimed at increasing efficiency and reducing CO2 emissions will contribute to reducing the consumption of fossil fuels and therefore to improving security of supply. Despite the large number of initiatives planned and implemented with a view to making mobility sustainable and free of CO2 in the future, it is also necessary to ensure in parallel to this that the current and future supply of fossil fuels, which are currently still necessary, is secure, whether by diversifying the sources or supply routes or by providing sufficient stocks of mineral oil products to overcome potential supply bottlenecks. Since Luxembourg does not have any refineries in its national territory and therefore imports no crude oil but only mineral oil products, the scope for diversifying the countries of origin is very limited. Regarding the imports of mineral oil products by country of origin, it must be taken into account that the majority by far comes from Belgium, followed by Germany, France and the Netherlands. In terms of the security of supply, it is important that the diversification of the countries of origin is also maintained in the future.  routes. Since the airport in Luxembourg is supplied with fuel directly via an underground pipeline (CEPS), the diversification of supply routes relates primarily to the mineral oil products diesel, petrol and fuel oil. The majority of imports are via road, with only around one fifth being handled by rail. The remainder of the imports are carried out by inland waterway via the Moselle. Owing to the limited opportunities to influence the transport routes, it is necessary for Luxembourg to keep sufficient stocks of mineral oil products in its national territory to be able to compensate for any disruptions to the supply routes.  As a member of the European Union (EU) and the International Energy Agency (IEA), Luxembourg is obliged to ractice, Luxembourg has consistently fulfilled its international obligations regarding the stockpiling of mineral oil in recent years. The importers of mineral oil products have fulfilled the national legal obligation of the compulsory storage of eight days in the national territory, while the other amounts must be kept either in the regional territory outside Luxembourg (37 days) or elsewhere in the EU.  Although access to the stocks accounted for in Luxembourg is guaranteed in the event of a crisis, it can also be  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 113   Luxembourg in the event of a local crisis. In the case of stocks kept further away from Luxembourg, the prompt transport of these stocks to Luxembourg in the event of a crisis is likely to be associated with relatively large logistics expenses (transport capacities, expenditure of time, etc.). If, in future, there is a clear and consistent downward trend in the consumption of the transport sector, the need to construct new tank farms would have to be modified.  In order to reduce the dependency on oil as far as possible and limit the environmental impact of transport, Luxembourg is pursuing a multidimensional strategic plan. The primary focus is on traffic avoidance and public transport. In addition, Luxembourg is promoting the introduction of e-mobility and alternative fuels, each of which must be based on renewable energy sources.  3.3.ii. Regional cooperation in this area In the electricity sector, the regional cooperation within the Energy Forum (PLEF) is the most important mechanism for the early recognition of problems with the security of supply from the perspective of Luxembourg. The Luxembourg government is working together with the Luxembourg transmission network operator, Creos, to actively support the drafting of the PLEF Adequacy Assessment, which was last updated in February 2018. The inclusion of the flow-based capacity calculation method for the first time, in particular, has further increased the validity of the monitoring. Based on this monitoring, which is based on a probabilistic approach, no critical energy security risks can be identified for Luxembourg at present. Further development of the methodology, analyses and reports is planned or already under way.  Joint exercises will also be organised in this same working group to improve emergency procedures and cooperation in a regional crisis. In this context, the active participation and cooperation with the Regional Security Center, TSCNet, should also be mentioned in order to prepare and coordinate activities relevant at regional level. As provided for in Article 37 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 on the internal market for electricity, regional cooperation in the field of security of supply will be further deepened by means of ention should be made of all of the activities defined and implemented under Regulation (EU) 2019/941 on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector, in particular:  Monitoring the security of electricity supply in the Union through the Electricity Coordination Group  Defining an electricity crisis and developing a common methodology for risk identification  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 114    Regional approach to identifying risk scenarios and to developing preventive, preparatory and mitigating measures  Drawing up and regularly updating risk-preparedness plans, including national, regional and, where applicable, bilateral measures  Agreeing on coordinated measures and technical, legal and financial arrangements  Complying with transparency requirements   At European level, the Luxembourg transmission system operator Creos is a member of ENTSO-E and is actively involved in the annual Mid-Term Adequacy Forecast. In addition to the reports mentioned above, this is used to assess and ensure security of supply in the electricity sector. In the gas sector, regional cooperation takes place in the Gas Forum of the Pentalateral Energy Forum. This forum brings together the Benelux countries with Germany and France. The Gas Forum consults national and regional risk assessments and ensures consistency between national preventive action plans and emergency plans established in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 of 25 October 2017 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply. The Gas Forum sets out a common approach to ensuring security of supply in the event of an emergency and reduces the risk of adverse effects that purely national measures could have. In the gas sector, the Member States are also obliged to conclude bilateral agreements on terms and conditions in order to be able to provide solidarity in accordance with Article 13 of Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 in the case of demand from neighbouring Member States. To this end, preliminary discussions have been held with neighbouring countries with a view to launching the relevant steps and agreements. In the oil sector, the Member States coordinate their supply and stockholding activities in the Oil Coordination Group, of which Luxembourg is a member. 3.3.iii. Any financing measures in this field at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds In the electricity sector, relevant network expansion measures are planned over the next few years, particularly at transmission grid level, to ensure energy security in Luxembourg. The financing of projects will be ensured through network charges.  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 115   In the oil sector, since importers of mineral oil products have a national legal obligation to hold mandatory stocks, they are also responsible for financing these obligations in accordance with market conditions.   