 and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 100   3.2.  enshrined in EU legislation) and is of particular importance for Luxembourg in achieving its energy and climate objectives, given its extremely dynamic economy. In the area of new buildings, Luxembourg is already at the forefront of the implementation of the energy efficiency requirements for residential buildings with virtually zero energy consumption and has successfully decoupled population growth from CO2 to pay particular attention to improving energy efficiency in the building sector. By increasing the renovation rate of buildings and using all available smart technologies, this sector has much to offer a climate neutral and competitive economy. As 50% of electricity consumption is in industry, this will also be a focus of energy efficiency policy. There is also a need to increase the efficiency of mobility (from internal combustion engines to electric motors, which are far more efficient). In general, all energy efficiency measures should pay particular attention to social impacts and measures should be taken to embed the new regulations in social terms.  3.2.i. Energy efficiency obligation schemes and alternative policy measures under Articles 7a and 7b and Article 20(6) of Directive 2012/27/EU and to be prepared in accordance with Annex II to this Regulation Continuation of the energy efficiency obligation scheme;  In order to transpose Article 7 of Directive 2012/27/EU into national law for the period up to 2020, Luxembourg introduced a national system of energy efficiency obligations in 2015. The instrument should lead to the achievement of the energy efficiency target under Article 7(1), subject to the possibility of using other alternative measures in the future.  gramme will target 1.2 to 1.5% of final energy and will cover all sectors. There were a few teething problems, but some of the parties bound by the programme have now improved their resources, invested in structures and developed concepts to improve the effectiveness of the mechanism.   and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 101   For these reasons, the Luxembourg government is determined to continue with and optimise the Energy Efficiency Obligation Scheme for the period 2021 to 2030 in order to comply with the obligation set out in Article 7 of the amended Energy Efficiency Directive.  The creation of new instruments in the field of energy saving for industry, small and medium-sized enterprises and large office buildings (de-risking financial instrument, transparency platform for audits, exemplary role of public buildings) will also increase the scope for energy efficiency investments for the -2030 will be set at 1.2 to 1.5% per year and will cover all sectors. In addition, the further development of the commitment system will include an adjustment to the penalties for failure to comply, making non-compliance with the savings commitment more costly than the investment required to meet the targets. To ensure that the framework is in force in time for the start of the new period (1 January 2021), details for the 2021-2030 period will be provided in the early implementation of EED II (Revised Energy Efficiency Directive) or via the current version of the Electricity Act [Stromgesetz]. Industrial sector  Strategies and measures aimed at creating a monitoring tool for businesses and future measures and framework conditions to support energy efficiency in industry by 2030 are set out in Section 3.1.1. Accord volontaire and My Energy G.I.E., which has been in existence since 1990, is a voluntary agreement to improve energy efficiency in the industrial sector in Luxembourg. The current agreement is valid from 2017 to the end of 2020 and includes 54 companies from the industrial and tertiary sectors. In return for fulfilling several requirements and achieving a 7% improvement target for a joint energy efficiency indicator for the reference periods 2014-2015 and 2020, participating companies will receive a tax credit on electricity and natural gas allowed under Council Directive 2003/96/EC of 27 October 2003 restructuring the Community framework for the taxation of energy products and electricity. This voluntary agreement is to be continued, deepened and extended after 2020 in order to reach out to more companies, especially SMEs. Improved communication and cooperation between participating companies should help to identify and make use of serve as a basis for this. In addition, the continuation of the voluntary agreement should lead to more ambitious energy efficiency improvement targets by encouraging and adequately supporting companies in  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 102   the implementation of identified savings measures and providing additional opportunities for action in the financing and implementation of projects.  Energy audits transparency platform An important prerequisite for investing in energy efficiency is detailed knowledge of potential savings in an industrial process or a building. This is ensured by means of audits. As these audits are currently only mandatory for very large consumers, a simplified version will be extended to medium-sized industrial processes and office buildings. In addition, a transparency platform will be set up for the results of energy audits, following the example set by France. This will improve the contact beunder the Energy Savings Regulation and industrial, SME and office buildings.   New financial instrument for energy efficiency in industry and large office buildings Experience in recent years has shown that there is a large discrepancy between the savings potential identified in the audits and the savings actually achieved by industry and owners of large office buildings. requirements. In order to remedy this discrepancy, consideration is being given to making the financial instrument in close cooperation with the EIB (European Investment Bank).  De-risking Although the financial aid described in point 3.1.1.iii. helps to improve the economic viability of projects in the field of climate and environmental protection, it does not make it possible to remove all barriers and obstacles to the use of environmental technologies in order to achieve national climate and energy objectives more quickly. In this context, the Luxembourg government is looking into creating an additional financial instrument that will allow a number of obstacles to the implementation of energy efficiency measures to be addressed in a systemic manner at national level. A pre-- is to be developed and promoted for energy transition projects at industry and SME level. The aim is to increase investment in energy efficiency measures through improved use and a more transparent analysis of data from existing building and industrial projects. Pre-financing will be provided through a state part of the climate and energy fund, will be used to assess and mitigate existing risks. In addition, a pooling instrument is to be created that can be used to quantify legal, financial and ecological aspects (possibly as  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 103   a research project). Within the scope of de-risking projects, it is also important to create a mechanism   Lean & Green programme  Lean & Greeno be implemented with stakeholders from the transport and 2 emissions. The programme was set up by Connekt, an independent network of Dutch companies and public authorities, with the aim of encouraging companies to reduce their environmental impact. Any company that can demonstrate, on the basis of a detailed action plan, that it will achieve a 20% reduction in CO2 emissions over the next 5 years can apply  As a number  The optimisation of the logistics sector will also support the conversion of supply fleets to small electric trucks and cargo bikes.  3.2.ii. Long-term renovation strategy to support the renovation of the national stock of residential and non-residential buildings, both public and private, including strategies, measures and actions to stimulate cost-effective deep renovation and strategies and actions to target the worst performing segments of the national building stock, in accordance with Article 2a of Directive 2010/31/EU Implementation of the national renovation strategy Within the framework of Directive 2012/27/EU of 25 October 2012 on energy efficiency, amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC, in November 2016, the Luxembourg government published the further development of the national building renovation strategy drawn up within the framework of the third NEEAP, which is based on four guiding principles:  Priority to high-efficiency renovations  Affordability of energy renovation measures  Alignment of energy policy and heritage protection objectives  Inclusion of elements of sustainable construction and the circular economy   and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 104   These guiding principles are consistently taken into account in the development of projects, in awareness-raising and information policy and in legal or regulatory amendments in the area of building renovation. In addition to the guiding principles, some 35 measures have been identified to reduce legal and financial barriers, among others, that have been reviewed and implemented within the scope of the work carried Conseil national de la construction durablepriorities:  To remove obstacles faced by building managers  associations  To adjust the decision-making quorums for the implementation of renovation measures   Municipalities should become pioneers in building renovation (climate pact, financial aid, logistical aid, competitions, etc.)  To examine the possibility of applying the reduced VAT rate of 3% to buildings constructed 10 years ago (instead of 20 years)   To promote energy-efficient renovation in the building stock by simplifying the administrative   Oil replacement programme in old buildings  An ambitious long-term building renovation strategy is being presented with a view to increasing the -term building renovation strategy as described in the EU Directive 2012/27/EU EED, the existing building renovation strategy is to be extended to include the following:  Monitoring of the existing renovation strategy  Creation of an interministerial working group  Workshops with stakeholders to define how the objectives will be achieved  Updated potential analysis or assessment of the baseline situation  Stronger social embedding of the measures The measures defined as part of the building renovation strategy drawn up in 2016 will be further developed, but may be extended by newly identified measures. For this purpose, workshops or a comprehensive survey to identify new measures can be implemented as in the existing building renovation strategy. The following measures, among others, have already been identified and are being implemented:  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 105    is also made available to tradesmen   larger apartment buildings   Systematic urban district or entire street rehabilitation   In addition, densification of the existing building stock, following the example of the City of Vienna, is being researched in pilot projects  Renovation of functional buildings In order to support building renovation in the non-residential sector, there are plans to extend the mandatory energy audits for large energy consumers in the commercial sector to SMEs, taking account of the specificities and possible simplifications for SMEs. This means that SMEs would also be obliged to have their energy consumption regularly checked in order to better assess the renovation potential of their buildings. In order to increase the energy performance and renovation rate of non-residential buildings, consideration is also being given to introducing a renovation obligation along the lines of the Dutch model.  In November 2018, a measure was introduced in the Netherlands setting the energy standard of office buildings at energy class C from 2023 onwards. Owners of existing properties are therefore obliged to renovate their buildings to energy standard C by 2023 or to prove that the necessary measures have been taken to this end. tock (housing and functional buildings) In order to improve and generalise the information base in the building stock, there are plans to introduce an  specifically for existing residential buildings, which should provide a better picture of the real renovation potential. The purpose of this energy passport is to provide the owner with a transparent and individualised ex-ante assessment of the renovation potential and the associated savings. There are also plans to introduce a similar  Post-densification At district level, the aim is to support the densification of the existing stock by simplifying the municipal framework conditions and promoting self-contained flats. To some extent, corresponding adjustments  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 106   have already been made as part of the revision of the existing development plans. However, they will be pursued further, especially for the municipalities that still need to implement this revision. In particular, the revision of the specific urban development plans for existing neighbourhoods can show an important tax effect in the case of densification. To raise the awareness of citizens in the participatory processes, there are also plans to make sample plans and regulations available in order to better inform the affected citizens about the possibilities of post-densification. There are also plans to make the cadastral register more flexible or to revise it in general, so as to allow for a sharper division of ownership within the buildings, particularly in the case of apartment blocks and terraced houses. The public social housing agencies SNHBM and Fonds du Logement will launch the first pilot projects in this area. Financing measures  climate bonus programme  The main support schemes have already been listed under 3.1.1.i. The following funding programmes are relevant in the field of building renovation:  The PRIMe House support programme offers investment grants for the energy-efficient and sustainable renovation of residential buildings. The support scheme has been extended and reviewed a number of times since 2001. The current programme runs until the end of 2020.  In addition, the sustainable energy renovation of residential buildings is supported via low-interest or (for low-income households) interest-free loans, with the technical requirements being the same as the PRIMe House criteria. There are plans to review and simplify the terms and conditions and application procedure, so that more homeowners can benefit from a climate loan in the future Reduced VAT rate of 3% The conditions for obtaining the reduced VAT rate of 3% for renovation work will be adapted and harmonised with the requirements of the PRIMe House programme. The aim is to examine whether owners of buildings constructed 10 years ago can benefit from the reduced VAT rate instead of the current 20 years.  3.2.iii. Description of policy and measures to promote energy services in the public sector and measures to remove regulatory and non-regulatory barriers that impede the uptake of energy performance contracting and other energy efficiency service models The ministries and administrations concerned are currently discussing how these barriers can be removed.  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 107    3.2.iv. Other planned strategies, measures and programmes to achieve the indicative national energy efficiency contributions for 2030 as well as other objectives referred to in point 2.2 (for example measures to promote the exemplary role of public buildings and energy-efficient public procurement, measures to promote energy audits and energy management systems, consumer information and training measures, and other measures to promote energy efficiency)  New construction In addition to the comprehensive energy-related renovation of buildings to increase energy efficiency, measures must also be implemented in the new build sector. The following measures are to be developed or expanded within the scope of the improvement of energy efficiency in new buildings:  Raising the building standard for non-residential buildings residential buildings in 2017, this standard will also apply to non-residential buildings from 2020/2021. This standard is to be further increased by 2030 and thredefined by improving energy efficiency requirements for new non-residential buildings.   Introduction of an A+ energy class for residential buildings new residential buildings has been in force since 2017. This is to be extended in the short term (A+ energy class) to ensure 100% renewable energy coverage.   Sustainability and health in construction   New residential and non-residential buildings will also integrate aspects such as health and well-being, alongside a stronger anchoring of sustainability. This will be implemented through the  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 108   the creation of a new label.  Toxic and harmful building materials are to be banned and a positive list of building materials is to be drawn up which includes natural and ecological options.   Circular economy  The concept of the circular economy will be further promoted in the construction sector in order to improve the quality of future buildings. This should be achieved through support programmes measures with regard to the circular economy in the construction sector can be found in Section 3.1.1.i.  Sustainable neighbourhoods  Made in Luxembourg ecodistricts Luxembourg will ensure that neighbourhoods built in the future allow for improved urban quality and quality of life while also being CO2-free. To this end, a definition of sustainable neighbourhoods, with uniform criteria, a clear methodology and new subsidies will be drawn up under the guidance of the Minister for Spatial Development. In addition, the existing system of building inspections is to be analysed and, if necessary, revised in order to guarantee compliance with building and energy standards through increased and harmonised building inspections by the municipalities. Green data centres  As digitalisation progresses steadily, data centres are essential. However, in the future these will need to be built in a far more energy efficient manner and operators will have to make greater efforts to operate more efficiently. It is important to apply the best technical solutions, such as immersion cooling, and to use the waste heat produced by data centres for heating or cooling buildings or whole neighbourhoods. The reduction of energy consumption and the preference for renewable energies should also be implemented at the level of computer infrastructures, such as data centres, which is why the Luxembourg government is committed to creating appropriate framework conditions for green data centres, including at EU level.  Government to lead by example   -efficient efficiency and the use of renewable energy in government and government-related buildings.  of Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on energy  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 109   efficiency, Luxembourg has identified energy efficiency measures in public institutions that will be partially adopted and further developed for 2030. For example, the government has taken the lead as a state and has stepped up efforts in recent years and implemented an ambitious renovation programme. In order to calculate the renovations, Luxembourg drew up an inventory of the public buildings concerned. According to Article 5(7) of the EED, public facilities that are not part of the central government (e.g. schools) should also be encouraged to act as role models in the energy efficiency of buildings. For example, the public social housing agencies, the Société Nationale des Habitations à Bon Marché (SNHBM) and the Fonds du Logement are working to gradually renovate and improve the energy efficiency of the rental housing stock.  The airport in the capital city is to be transformed to become the Findel Green Airport within this framework. In particular, this involves the implementation of energy-saving measures and the use of renewable energy, primarily to convert the existing terminal into an energy-pioneering role is the replacement of all light bulbs in public buildings and street lighting with LEDs by 2025 in order to improve efficiency and contribute to the fight against light pollution. In addition, the introduction of a state Top Runner programme will encourage the purchase of energy-efficient equipment from the state and municipalities. Businesses Strategies and measures with regard to financing measures for new construction can be found in Section 3.1.1.  Pacte logement 2.0    3.2.v. Description of measures to exploit energy efficiency potentials in gas and electricity infrastructure Electricity and gas network operators are continuously pursuing programmes with a view to ensuring security of supply in the future. These programmes include investment measures for the conversion, expansion, maintenance and replacement of the respective infrastructures. In addition to ensuring security of supply, these measures also help ensure that networks are constantly up-to-date, thereby contributing to improving energy efficiency.  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 110   Other specific measures to exploit energy efficiency potentials in gas and electricity infrastructure are sometimes not foreseen.  3.2.vi. Any regional cooperation in this area Specific measures for regional cooperation aimed at exploiting energy efficiency potentials in gas and electricity infrastructure are sometimes not foreseen. 3.2.vii. Financing measures, including Union support and the use of Union funds, in this area at national level Strategies and measures with regard to financing measures for the energy efficiency sector can be found in Section 3.1.1.   