 and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 45   2.3. Energy security dimension Luxembourg has neither its own large power plants for electricity generation nor gas production and storage facilities and is therefore highly dependent on imported energy. Security of supply is the responsibility of the undertakings operating on the market and those regulated by the regulatory authority (Institut Luxembourgeois de Régulation, ILR), as provided for in the revised Law of 1 August 2007 on the organisation of the electricity market and the revised Law of 1 August 2007 on the organisation of the gas market. The government is responsible for monitoring security of supply.  nergy imports calls for a well-functioning European internal market for electricity and gas. It is therefore aiming to rapidly achieve an internal electricity and gas market with intensive cross-border competition between suppliers and tap in to the flexibility potential of consumers. Luxembourg is also in favour of further intensifying regional cooperation on security of supply in the electricity and gas sectors. On the basis of their legal obligations, electricity and gas network operators attach great importance to ensuring that their infrastructure is in good condition and in line with the state economic and demographic development. The widespread installation of smart meters for all consumers will allow network operators to manage their networks even more intelligently and securely. The expansion of renewable energy that is needed to achieve the targets will allow Luxembourg to noticeably reduce its dependence on electricity imports. Nevertheless, due to the enormous demand for electricity by industry, domestic energy sources will still only be able to make a certain contribution to y, Luxembourg is aiming to significantly increase the share of consumers actively participating in the electricity market (including by setting up an energy data platform). The increased thermal insulation requirements for new buildings and the planned renovation strategy for the building stock will lead to a downward revision of the demand for natural gas. Luxembourg has no oil reserves of its own and must therefore import 100% of the oil it consumes. Moreover, Luxembourg does not have any refineries on its national territory. Therefore, only mineral oil products, and not crude oil, are imported. The vast majority of these come from Belgium, followed by Germany, France and the Netherlands. In the interests of security of supply, it is important to maintain the diversification of countries of origin in the future and to diversify supply routes. Since the airport in Luxembourg is supplied with fuel directly via an underground pipeline (CEPS), the diversification of supply routes relates primarily to the mineral oil products diesel, petrol and fuel oil. The majority of imports are  and climate plan for the period 2021-2030 | 46   via road, with only about a fifth being handled by rail. The remainder is imported by inland waterway via the Moselle to Mertert, the only port in Luxembourg.  As a member of the European Union and the International Energy Agency (IEA), Luxembourg is obliged to importers of mineral oil products have a national legal obligation to hold compulsory stocks of 8 days on national territory, 37 days on regional territory outside Luxembourg, and the remainder elsewhere in the EU.   