  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Research, innovation and competitiveness 45  2.5. Research, innovation and competitiveness a) National objectives and funding targets for public and, where available, private research and innovation relating to the Energy Union, including, where appropriate, a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met. 1. Reduction of the civilisation gap between Poland and highly developed economies and improvement of the quality of life of Polish people, as well as the fulfilment of the development aspirations of the present and future generations consistently with the sustainable development principle Increase in expenditure on research and development activities in Poland to 1.7% of the GDP in 2020 and 2.5% of the GDP in 2030 National objectives and budgetary funding targets for research and innovation, including with regard to the Energy Union, are pursued within the framework of the state science, technology and innovation policy. The objectives and targets of this policy have been defined in the strategic direction guidelines for research and development formulated in the National Research Programme (NRP) adopted by the Council of Ministers, which will be updated in 2020. The main criteria applied in the NRP to choose strategic directions for research and development include the long-term needs of the economy, high quality of research in national institutions  global competitiveness, development of innovative business sectors at the micro-, small- and medium-sized scale based on new Polish technologies, or the priority directions in research development defined in European research programmes and strategies (e.g. SET-Plan and Horizon 2020). Strategic directions for research and development defined in the NRP are as follows: 1. New energy technologies, 2. Diseases of affluence, new medicines and regenerative medicine, 3. Advanced information, telecommunications and mechatronic technologies, 4. Modern materials technologies, 5. Natural environment, agriculture and forestry, 6. Social and economic development of Poland in the conditions of increasingly global markets, 7. State security and defence. The broad-ranging energy and climate issues addressed by the NRP, including low-carbon technologies, which fall with the scope of the research, innovation and competitiveness pillar pursuant to the Regulation on the Governance of the Energy Union, are included in as many as three out of the above seven strategic research and development directions, namely: (1.) New energy technologies, (4.) Modern materials technologies, (5.) Natural environment, agriculture and forestry. As noted in the description of Strategic Direction 1 of the NRP. New energy technologies, research conducted in this area should support the implementation of the Polish energy policy and the targets of the energy and climate policy of the European Union. The timeframe for the strategic research and development directions and strategic  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Research, innovation and competitiveness 46  research programmes are defined in a manner ensuring the stability of the research conducted. However, they should be modified in correspondence to the changing conditions, tasks and needs of the economy and society. Strategic directions for research and development are to be implemented over a period of 10-15 years, and strategic research programmes over 3-7 years, taking into account realistic funding levels. The pursuit of the above will be founded equally on increasing research and development funding in Poland and establishing new rules for using such funding in a way reflecting the present-day conditions. This will result, inter alia, in raising the level and effectiveness of research in Poland, understood as the delivery of research results and products with a high cognitive quality and social, economic and technological usefulness. The aggregate effect of measures in all the NRP areas is the enhancement of innovation of the economy and an increase in the significance and competitiveness of Polish science internationally. The implementation of the NRP helps to enhance the effects of research in new technological solutions, the number of patents and the development of an innovative economy. The achievement of the aforementioned objective requires the concentrated efforts of the scientific community and financial expenditures from the state budget on a limited number of singled out priority areas. The update of the above national strategic research and innovation directions, priorities and objectives regarding energy and climate as part of the new research policy of the state will be aligned to the new Energy Policy of Poland and will contribute to its delivery. b) If appropriate, national objectives including long-term targets (2050) for the deployment of low-carbon technologies, including for decarbonising energy- and carbon-intensive industrial sectors and, if applicable, for related carbon transport and storage infrastructure. 2. Directions for development of energy innovations: 1) Improvement of competitiveness of the Polish energy sector through: - continuous technological advancement and efficiency of operation; - implementing competitive organisational and business models; - optimising resource use. 2) Maximisation of gains for the Polish economy derived from changes in the energy sector through: - taking advantage of innovation in the energy sector for industrial development, - reducing specific energy consumption and consumption of raw materials, - fostering cooperation between enterprises, public institutions and the research sector. In 2017, the Ministry of Energy developed a document on innovation in the energy sector entitled Directions for Energy Innovation Development. The document covers energy innovations both from the perspective of technologies, processes and funding sources and models, and from the perspective of the implementation of new solutions, and contains a list of indicators relating to innovations and the development of new business models. Cooperation is pursued with energy sector entities with a view to engaging this sector    II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Research, innovation and competitiveness 47  in innovation projects, and with organisations supporting the development of research, innovations and implementations. Projects implementing the Directions for Energy Innovation Development concern the following areas:  integrated and interconnected energy system giving a central role to the energy user;  effective and flexible energy generation and use of raw materials that combine environmental impact mitigation with energy security;  diversification of energy generation and use technologies;  green and energy-efficient city. In the context of energy-related R&D&I, a central focus will be on supporting investments in infrastructure (including technologies) for the production, storage and use of hydrogen (e.g. support for research into hydrogen- and coal-based fuels), synthesis gas, and methanol for energy purposes. R&D and commercialisation support in the area of carbon cells and carbon nanostructures in energy storage will be also important. 3. Acceleration of energy sale in such areas as: air protection, RES, energy saving, water and waste water management, waste management and the protection of biodiversity by Polish companies in international markets An increase in the sale of technologies by Polish companies in international markets will be supported by specialised training for entrepreneurs, foreign missions with the participation of representatives of ministries, the Polish Government or the President of Poland, and the participation of business entities in international events, fairs, and exhibitions. This form of assistance enables Polish companies to increase considerably sales of technologies on international markets at a relatively low cost. At present, the GreenEvo programme is planned to be implemented in the period 2018-2020. Acceleration of the sales of Polish air protection, RES, energy savings, water and sewage management, waste management and biodiversity conservation technologies on foreign markets. The improvement of sales of Polish environmental technologies will be supported through the GreenEvo initiative (Green Evo  Green Technology Accelerator). The Accelerator will organise training for entrepreneurs to prepare them for foreign expansion, and business missions for such events as international fairs or exhibitions, as well as meetings accompanying foreign visits of representatives of the Polish government. This form of support can be used to promote effectively Polish environmental technologies on foreign markets, with relatively low financial outlays. Currently, the 2018-2020 edition of the GreenEvo programme is under way. GreenEvo supports entrepreneurs subject to the de minimis principle applicable to State Aid. Beyond 2020, Poland plans to support foreign transfer of Polish environmental technologies by the successive rounds of the GreenEvo programme and through inter-ministerial cooperation.   4. Determination of the potential of forest areas for carbon dioxide sinking and the  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Research, innovation and competitiveness 48  launching of research aimed at developing better methods of carbon dioxide balance calculation A research project is envisaged to be funded as part of the Forest Carbon Farms (FCF) pilot project, which explores the mitigation capabilities of forest areas as a result of additional measures in these areas. The above work is expected to align the forest ecosystem carbon balance model to Polish conditions in order to determine accumulated carbon resources in all forest layers. The project is expected to develop carbon dioxide balance calculation methods, inter alia for reporting purposes, and to determine the potential for employing additional economic measures to improve the balance of greenhouse gas within forest land. As one of the effects, the research project will create detailed forest development models specific for Poland, such as to enable changes in the carbon balance for forest ecosystems in Poland to be estimated more precisely.   5. Determining the potential for production, use and development of hydrogen technologies in Poland. The draft Hydrogen Technology Development Programme, which is being prepared now and responds to the growing need to reduce the share of conventional fuels in favour of alternative fuels, envisages setting the main lines for developing the potential of hydrogen technologies. The purpose of the above work is to address aspects related to the production, transport, use, and storage of hydrogen, taking into account the existing support system and the EU and Polish legal context. Owing to its properties, hydrogen can be an important area of development for the Polish economy. In accordance with the Hydrogen Technology Development Programme, there are new potential uses for hydrogen in:  the energy sector;  the transport sector;  the natural gas transmission system. The use of hydrogen is becoming a major direction of research and development, therefore activities are planned to support areas of the hydrogen economy and R&D. b) Where applicable, national objectives with regard to competitiveness. Enhancing the competitiveness of the economy through: - innovation, export and increasing capital mobilised for investment in the enterprise sector (Specific Objective I of the SRD), - fuller exploitation of the social and territorial potential (Specific Objective II of the SRD); and - projects enhancing the efficiency of public institutions that serve enterprises and citizens (Specific Objective III of the SRD), - enhancing sustainable use of renewable resources in industry, - automation, robotisation and digitisation of enterprises. Based on experience, it is envisaged that, in the period 2021-2030, the main competitiveness-oriented activities will focus around investing in areas ensuring an  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Research, innovation and competitiveness 49  increase in the value added of the economy and its competitiveness in foreign markets. A key role will be played by support instruments for businesses willing to engage in and develop (continue) B+R+I activities and thereby improve their competitiveness, especially in areas constituting economic priorities, including: - high-efficiency, low-carbon and integrated energy generation, storage, transmission and distribution systems; - smart and energy-efficient building technologies; - environment-friendly transport solutions; - minimisation of waste generation, including waste unfit for processing, and the use of waste for materials production and energy generation purposes (recycling and other forms of recovery). - optimisation of the management of non-renewable resources with a focus on their quality, value and reusability, - Eco-innovations. There are plans to use instruments for supporting R&D leading to innovations in environmental and low-carbon technologies and in technologies enabling effective (economical) waste management. 