 III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 105  3.4 Internal energy market26 3.4.1. Electricity infrastructure a) Policies and measures to achieve the targeted level of interconnectivity presented in 2.4. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, power transmission system operator (PSE S.A.), Government Plenipotentiary for Strategic Energy Infrastructure, URE * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. 1. The availability of the current cross-border interconnections will be increased by optimising the allocation of available capacity based on the flow-based approach27 It is expected that by better addressing network conditions (including congestion), the FBA, which is planned to be implemented by 2025, will enable a more accurate calculation of electricity flows. In connection with this optimisation measure, an increase is expected in the transmission capacities made available by Poland for cross-border trade. The determination of interconnection capacity planned in 2030 depends on the implementation of the investment schedule and progress in the implementation of the coordinated methodology for capacity determination. In view of the above, Poland is unable to set a numerical target at the present stage. It should be stressed that phenomena such as unscheduled compensatory power flows (loop flows) have to be taken into account when determining the interconnectivity factor. In accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the internal market for electricity, an Action Plan that addresses the nature of structural network congestion in Poland has been prepared with a view to making available 70% of transmission capacity. When the Action Plan is applied, the final deadline for achieving the CEP 70% target is 31 December 2025. The Action Plan will be carried out from 1 January 2020. The measures adopted under the Action Plan are scheduled over four years (1 January 2020 to 31 December 2023). 2. With respect to the development of the transmission network by 2030, the following three projects concerning the development of the national transmission network and cross-border interconnections have been included in the TYNDP2018: 1. GerPol Improvements 2. GerPol Power Bridge I 3. LitPol Link Stage II Poland is aware of the need to ensure efficient and well developed network infrastructure, which is why the investment area related to transmission infrastructure is regarded as extremely important. The cross-border interconnection capacity between Member States should be increased primarily by the optimum use of existing interconnections and the elimination of barriers preventing market participants from getting access to the grid, including the elimination of bottlenecks in national systems. The purpose of GerPol Improvements is to increase cross-border transmission capacities within the synchronous area (covering interconnections at the border with Germany, the Czech Republic and Slovakia) by switching the 220 kV Krajnik-Vierraden line to 400 kV and installing phase-shifters on the existing Poland-Germany interconnections. The implementation of the project will enable      III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 106   The purpose of GerPol Power Bridge I is to increase cross-border transmission capacities within the Polish synchronous area. Looking forward to 2030, the expansion of the internal transmission network is planned in the western part of the country, which will enable increasing import capabilities of the National Power System by 1,500 MW and its export capacities by 500 MW. GerPol Power Bridge I is included in the fourth PCI list, published in 2019, and covers the following investment projects: - the internal 400 kV Krajnik-Baczyna line, - - - the internal 400 kV Baczyna-Plewiska line. LitPol Link Stage II was a follow-up to the construction of an interconnection between Poland and Lithuania to achieve the planned transmission capacity of 1,000 MW in both directions. The construction of additional transmission network facilities in Poland and Lithuania (including the second back-to back converter at the Alytus station) was planned under the project. However, in 2016, the Lithuanian Government decided not to proceed with the construction of the second converter in view of ongoing discussions within the framework of BEMIP HLG on another option of interconnection with the European transmission system, which was to include elements of LitPol Link Stage II. -line. The investment project will be completed by 2023 and will result in the creation of conditions for electricity exchange with the Lithuanian electricity system while ensuring safe operation of this interconnection. In connection with the political agreement of 28 June 2018 between the Baltic states and Poland concerning the synchronisation of the Baltic states, Poland regards this project as necessary for the synchronic integration of the Baltic States with the Continental Europe system and will proceed with the construction -withdrawal from the Alytus second direct current converter project. b) Regional cooperation in this area28 Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, power transmission system operator (PSE S.A.), Government Plenipotentiary for Strategic Energy Infrastructure * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. on Flexibility (SG III)), for the implementation of the FBA for calculating and allocating transmission capacities throughout the region and the adoption of fair rules for settling the costs of remedying measures conducted in the region. To increase the transmission capacities of cross-border interconnections Poland intends to develop cooperation with neighbouring countries, primarily with the Republic of Lithuania and the Federal Republic of Germany. Among the positive results of cooperation to date is the construction of a and, at the same time, on the Polish side, the construction and modernisation of power lines and stations in three provinces. Eleven major network infrastructure investment project were carried out as part of the project, four 400 kV power lines were constructed with an aggregate length of ca. 400 km, five power stations were constructed and two power stations already in operation were modernised. c) If applicable, financing measures in this area at   III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 107   national level, including EU support and the use of EU funds. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, URE, MFiPR, MR * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. The transmission system operator will use any revenues resulting from the allocation of interconnection in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 714/2009 and its amending Regulation COM (2016)861. The President of the Energy Regulatory Office (URE) will monitor the implementation of this measure. By 31 July of each year, the President of URE publishes a report specifying: - the amount of revenue collected for the 12-month period up to 30 June of the year concerned, - the use made of the revenues in question, together with verification that use complies with the amended Regulation 714/2009, its amending Regulation COM (2016)861 and the Guidelines; and - information on whether the total amount of congestion income is devoted to one or more of the three prescribed purposes. The assignment of income from the allocation of interconnection capacity will contribute to ensuring the desirable level of the available cross-border transmission capacity and to developing transmission infrastructure. 2. Inclusion of projects which can contribute to the integration of regional markets in the list of Projects of Common Interest (PCI) and their effective implementation Poland actively participates in the preparation of lists of Projects of Common Interest (PCI). The lists created so far include projects promoted by Polskie Sieci Elektroenergetyczne S.A.(PSE S.A.). In the period 2021-2030, Poland will seek to include new PCIs in future PCI lists, which will contribute to the further integration of regional markets. 3. Investment support under the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) Poland intends to take advantage of funding for infrastructure projects under the Connecting Europe Facility as part of the future financial perspective. The CEF instrument is dedicated to PCIs and Poland will seek the PCI status to be granted to new infrastructure projects. 4. Development of the gas transmission network Support in the form of EU funds should be allocated to, among other things, the development of a transmission network in Poland. Following the implementation of transmission investments, it will be possible to increase the volumes of natural gas transmitted to consumers connected both to the transmission and distribution networks, including in the areas not yet connected to gas infrastructure. GAZ-SYSTEM is going to carry out most of the planned intersystem projects by the end of 2022, i.e. under the current financial perspective, which includes the expansion of the LNG terminal in ant to the new Ten-Year National Plan (TYNP) 2018-2027, a far-reaching investment plan is to be carried out in the first five-year period, i.e. from 2018 to 2022. In 2023-2028, that is in the actual period of implementation of the future EU financial perspective, GAZ-SYSTEM's investment plans focus on the expansion of the transmission network in the eastern part of Poland and in other regions of the country.    III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 108  3.4.2. Energy transmission infrastructure a) Policies and measures related to the elements set out under 2.4.2, including, where applicable, specific measures to enable the delivery of Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) and other key infrastructure projects. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, power transmission system operator (PSE S.A.), gas transmission system operator (GAZ-SYSTEM S.A.), Government Plenipotentiary for Strategic Energy Infrastructure, electricity and gas distribution system operators, URE * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. 1. Inclusion of projects which can contribute to the integration of regional markets in the list of Projects of Common Interest (PCI) and their effective implementation Poland is actively participating in the preparation of lists of Projects of Common Interest (PCI) in relation to electricity and natural gas investments. The lists to date include projects promoted by the Polish electricity transmission network operator Polskie Sieci Elektroenergetyczne S.A.(PSE S.A.) and the Polish natural gas transmission network operator OGP GAZ-SYSTEM S.A. In the period 2021-2030, Poland will seek to include new PCIs in future PCI lists that will contribute to the further integration of regional markets, their competitiveness, the safety of energy supply and sustainable development. 2. Investment support under the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) It is reasonable to keep the possibility of funding infrastructure projects under the Connecting Europe Facility as part of the future financial perspective. The CEF instrument is dedicated to PCIs and Poland will seek the PCI status to be granted to new infrastructure projects.  s of Common Interest in the first, second and third lists of Projects of Common Interest (PCI). The projects located in the Poland-Lithuania and Poland- The PCI list published in 2017 includes three Polish projects forming part of the NSI East Group: - 3.14.2 Krajnik-Baczyna internal line (expected to be completed by the end of 2023); - -; - 3.14.4 Baczyna-Plewiska internal line (expected to be completed by the end of 2023); and one project forming part of the BEMIP Group: - - The aforementioned projects are expected to be carried out as part of investment activities aimed at developing the transmission network and cross-border interconnections by 2030.   The PCI list published in 2019 includes four Polish projects forming part of the NSI East Gas Group: - 6.2.1 Poland-Slovakia Interconnector - 6.2.2 North-South gas corridor in Eastern Poland - 6.2.10. Poland- - 6.2.11 North-South gas corridor in Western Poland and three projects forming part of BEMIP Gas: - 8.3.2 Poland-Denmark Interconnector ['Baltic Pipe'] - 8.5 Poland- - 8.7   Implementation of investment tasks consisting in the construction of infrastructure enabling gas supplies to Poland from new sources (Norway and LNG), the development of the national transmission network, the increase of storage, offtake and injection capacity of underground gas    III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 109  storage facilities, and the construction of a system of interconnections integrating the national transmission system with the neighbouring markets. Expected effects for 2030: Operational cross-border interconnections with the neighbouring EU countries and Ukraine and an expanded and modernised transmission network enabling gas to be supplied to customers in Poland and abroad. 5. Monitoring of the implementation, by the operators, of investment projects included in the development plans for meeting current and future electricity demand An energy company transmitting or distributing gaseous fuels or energy is required to prepare a development plan for its area of operation, concerning the satisfaction of current and future demand for gaseous fuels or energy, for a period of at least three years. Pursuant to Article 16(2) of the Energy Law (Journal of Laws 2017, item 220), a gas transmission system operator and an electricity transmission system operator are required to prepare a development plan concerning the satisfaction of current and future demand for gaseous fuels or electricity for a period of 10 years. The aforementioned plan is subject to updating every two years as regards demand for gaseous fuels, and every three years as regards electricity demand. Pursuant to Article 16(4) of the Energy Law, a gas distribution system operator and an electricity distribution system operator are to prepare a development plan concerning the satisfaction of current and future demand for gaseous fuels or electricity for a period of at least five years. The President of the Energy Regulatory Office (URE) is obliged, under Article 23(2a)(2) of the Energy Law, to prepare a report presenting and assessing, among other things, the implementation of the plans referred to in Article 16(2) and 16(4) (i.e. development plans concerning the satisfaction of current and future demand for gaseous fuels or electricity of the operators of the transmission and distribution systems). The report is to be prepared in accordance with Article 23(2c) of the Energy Law every two years. It was prepared in the years 2013, 2015 and 2017. In addition to the above, the achievement of the planned volumes is analysed on an annual basis and the results of the analysis are used in the process of agreeing subsequent editions of development plans or their updates. Such analyses are conducted on the basis of annual reports on the implementation of the development plan, which energy companies are obliged to submit on the basis of Article 16(18) of the Energy Law. In the period 2021-2030, the President of URE will monitor the implementation of development plans on an annual basis and will prepare, on a biannual basis, a report presenting and assessing the conditions for undertaking and conducting business activities in the field of electricity generation, transmission or distribution and the implementation of development plans of transmission and distribution system operators with respect to the satisfaction of current and future demand for gaseous fuels or energy.   b) Regional cooperation in this area29 Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, power transmission system operator 1. Integration of the electricity transmission networks of the Baltic States The third list of Projects of Common Interest (PCI) was published in 2017, including projects relating to the integration of the networks of the Baltic states and the North-South (N-S) Corridor projects. -2., as an element of the Baltic Energy Market Interconnection Plan (BEMIP Electricity) corridor. The investment project will be carried out before 2030, and its effects will include the creation of  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 110  (PSE S.A.), gas transmission system operator (GAZ-SYSTEM S.A.), Government Plenipotentiary for Strategic Energy Infrastructure * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. conditions for the exchange of electricity with the Lithuanian electricity system, while ensuring the secure operation of this interconnection. On 28 June 2018, on the sidelines of the European Council, an agreement on the synchronisation of the Baltic states (BS) with the electricity system of the Continental Europe was signed by the Prime Ministers of Poland and the Baltic states and the President of the European Commission in the form of a Political Road Map. The synchronisation process will be carried out using the existing double-circuit alternating current (AC) line between Poland and Lithuania (LitPol Link) and constructing an offshore direct current (HVDC) connection between Poland and Lithuania. 2. Construction of a gas interconnection between the transmission systems of Poland and Ukraine The launching of the Hermanowice-Bilche Volytsia two-way high-pressure gas interconnection with an annual capacity of up to 5 billion m3. The effect of the interconnection will be to increase the export capacity of the Polish gas market and provide conditions to increase the degree of utilisation of the transmission capacity of the Polish transmission system, as well as to enable Polish entities to use underground gas storage facilities located in the territory of Ukraine.   c) If applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including EU support and the use of EU funds. Responsible/involved parties*: MFiPR, MR, MAP * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. 1. Financial support for the construction of electricity transmission and distribution and gas transmission and distribution infrastructure Given the electricity system interconnections target set at 15%, support must be provided for this area within the next financial perspective. The acceleration of the transition of the EU power system towards a low-carbon system and the increasing share of renewable energy sources in energy mix results in the need to ensure appropriate funds to invest in flexible generation sources and the expansion of gas and electricity infrastructures in relation to distribution and transmission networks. Financial support for the area in question in the financial perspectives 2021-2027 and 2028-2034 is desirable. The amount and scope of support for distribution projects should take into account the need to reduce low-carbon emission and to improve the quality of the air. Support for cross-border electricity and gas interconnections is possible as part of the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) or other EU financial instruments to be in operation after 2020. Strong competition from Member States in the process of seeking funds for the expansion of transmission infrastructure results in a situation where financial support, if any, as part of this source will only be granted to few investment projects. If necessary, funds will be applied for under the Connecting Europe Facility financial instrument or other EU financial instruments in operation after 2020.   2. Development of an electricity transmission network This category covers the following project areas, in which Polskie Sieci Elektroenergetyczne S.A. operates. enhances the energy efficiency of the electricity transmission network in Poland. - Expansion of the transmission network to improve the reliability of power evacuation from conventional energy sources   - Expansion of the transmission network to improve the reliability of power evacuation from  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 111  renewable energy sources  location of the project (province): Zachodniopomorskie, Wielkopolskie; - Development of the transmission network to enhance transmission capacities of the NPS  locati - Enhancement of the security of electricity supplies and the improvement of the conditions of supply from the transmission network   - Interconnection of and power evacuation from the first nuclear power plant in Poland  the construction of a nuclear power plant will imply the need to adapt the transmission network to safe power evacuation from the facility. The determination of the investment needs will be possible once the location has been selected and the basic parameters of the facility have been specified; - Interconnection of and power evacuation from off-shore wind farms (including the construction of off-shore transmission capacities). The scope of the necessary investments in transmission networks will depend on the installed capacity of off-shore wind farms and the model of their connection to the NPS.   3. Improving the reliability of electricity supply to consumers, including conversion of MV overhead lines to underground lines in forested areas. Over 41,000 km of overhead MV lines are located in forest and woodland areas, where the overhead-to-underground conversion is particularly important for the reduction of the causes and effects of failures. To achieve a more reliable operation of the network, medium voltage networks must be successively converted from overhead to underground lines. For this purpose, a national plan of overhead-to-underground conversion until 2040 will be developed in 2020. Additionally, equipping medium voltage line connectors with remote control systems is also regarded as a priority. Appropriate funding for the aforementioned investments needs to be guaranteed. 4. Provision of gas supply infrastructure in Poland through the development of the distribution network and local LNG supply stations If financing is obtained from EU funds as part of Multiannual Financial Frameworks for the period 2021-2027 for projects in the gas sector, a portion of funds should go to the gas distribution sector understood as a distribution network and local networks equipped with local LNG regasification stations, with an emphasis on the following issues: - civilisational advancement of rural areas and Eastern Poland not connected to gas infrastructure; - reduction of low-carbon emissions  PM2.5 and PM10 (smog); - gas as low-carbon fuel in the context of CO2 emissions. Despite the fact that in a vast majority of cases investments in distribution networks are regarded as commercial investments, it is appropriate to accelerate investments enabling an increment in areas covered by gas supply infrastructure. The measures taken are expected to result in bringing gas infrastructure to ca. 77% of Polish municipalities (compared to the current figure of 65%). As part of the assessment of projects for which financial support is sought, the impact of the project  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 112  on the air pollution with particulate matter should be treated as an equally important criterion as maturity (understood as a possibility of carrying out the investment project within the financial perspective). Plans for the provision of gas supply infrastructure for areas currently regarded as most polluted on the basis of the official data of the Chief Inspectorate for Environmental Protection ( -    5. Expansion of gas transmission infrastructure In the case of granting financing from EU funds for investments in the gas sector, the area covers -SYSTEM S.A.: - Rembelszczyzna-Wronów DN 1000 gas pipeline, - Rozwadów--Wronów gas pipeline with a diameter of at least DN 700, - -Rozwadów gas pipeline with a diameter of at least DN 700, - Hermanowice- - Gustorzyn-Wronów DN 1000 gas pipeline, - Reszki-Gustorzyn DN 1000 gas pipeline, - - - -Mogilno-Odolanów DN 1000 gas pipeline, - Racibórz- - -Hat) The projects enhance the energy efficiency of the natural gas transmission system in Poland. Investments are a form of implementing the policy of levelling differences between regions in the area of energy network infrastructure. The projects are aimed at supporting the diversification of natural gas supplies through the expansion of transmission system infrastructure, which will allow to improve the energy security of Poland.  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 113  3.4.3. Market integration a) Policies and measures related to the elements set out in 2.4.3. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, URE, power transmission system operator (PSE S.A.) and gas transmission system operator (GAZ-SYSTEM S.A.), MK * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. 1. Integration and improvement of market operation In the past four years, the Government of the Republic of Poland has taken a number of measures aimed at integrating and improving the operation of the electricity market. The examples of such measures include:  increasing the exchange obligation from 15% to 30% (January 2018),  increasing the exchange obligation to 100% (January 2019),  changing price caps on the Day-Ahead Market, the Intraday Market and the Balancing Market,  significantly reducing technical barriers to cross-border trade within the synchronous area,  acting as a leader in the process of synchronising the power systems of the Baltic States with the continental Europe system. Poland is currently carrying out or planning to carry out shortly the following actions:  carrying out investments in electricity networks to significantly increase, by 2025, interconnection capacities made available for trade and in times of emergency (in connection with the implementation of the Action Plan),  European XBID trading system on the intraday energy market (IDM),  a programme to improve liquidity on the energy exchange through designation of market makers,  using marginal pricing as a basis for balancing market prices,  enabling balancing service providers to update their integrated scheduling bids as close as possible to real time (intraday market gate closure),  implementing the scarcity pricing mechanism,  phasing out system services in relation to the provision of the necessary capacity in the NPS: Cold Contingency Reserve (Interwencyjna Rezerwa Zimna), Interventional Operation (Praca Interwencyjna), Guaranteed DSR Emergency Programme (Gwarantowany Interwencyjny Program DSR), Operational Capacity Reserve (Operacyjna Rezerwa Mocy). 2. Implementation of the provisions of network codes and the European Commission guidelines concerning mechanisms for allocating transmission capacities and coupling markets in various time horizons Participation in the implementation of network codes and the European Commission guidelines prepared in the form of EU regulations. The aforementioned tasks will be implemented in accordance with the time schedules specified in these regulations. Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/459 of 16 March 2017 establishing a Network Code on Capacity Allocation Mechanisms in Gas Transmission Systems and repealing Regulation (EU) No 984/2013 took effect on 6 April 2017. The most important change to the amended network code consists in supplementing the regulation by new provisions setting out the Europe-wide rules for identifying market demand for the expansion of existing system interconnections or the construction of new interconnections and the rules for      III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 114  allocating additional capacity or new capacity referred to as incremental capacity (the so-called incremental procedure). The Regulation has also been supplemented by new dates of interconnection capacity auctions for annual and quarterly products. In the case of quarterly product auctions, the frequency with which they are organised has also been increased. Also the rules for offering firm and interruptive capacity for long-term products have been defined more precisely. Regulation (EU) 2019/943 widened the scope of the provisions of the existing network codes and Commission guidelines by introducing, amongst others, a target relating to the provision of cross-zonal capacity for the purposes of cross-border trade. This target has been imposed on TSOs as an obligation to provide market participants, as of 1 January 2020, with cross-zonal capacity at a level not lower than 70% of the transmission capacity for a given border or critical network element/contingency (CNEC) pair, subject to operational security limits. If network constraints exist in a bidding zone, a Member State may decide to meet the target at a later date on the assumption that the provided transmission capacity will increase annually. Poland has decided to prepare an Action Plan under which the 70% target will be reached by 31 December 2025 through the adoption of a variety of measures. On 17 March 2017, Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/460 of 16 March 2017 establishing a network code on harmonised transmission tariff structures for gas was published. It entered into force on 6 April 2017 and was to be implemented by 31 May 2019. The purpose of the new regulation is to enhance the transparency of the process of determining gas transmission tariffs, as well as to make their structures in the European Union area uniform. The Regulation also sets out consultation and publication obligations concerning the calculation methodology and the technical parameters to be adopted to calculate transmission tariffs, which is to ensure the users of EU systems a greater predictability of the level of fees and their comparability. Solutions enabling the application of a discount at the entry to the transmission system from an LNG terminal have also been adopted. The adoption of the uniform standards of capacity allocation in transmission systems throughout the EU will contribute to the smooth operation of the gas market and to increasing energy security. The implementation of the Code concerning the harmonisation of gas transmission tariff structures should contribute to a better integration of the European gas market, enhancement of the security of supplies and the development of system interconnections, which in turn may improve the competitiveness of EU companies and will contribute to reducing gas bills issued to households. 3. Monitoring the security of electricity and natural gas supplies in various time horizons The President of the Energy Regulatory Office (URE) is obliged, under Article 23(2)(20) of the Energy Law, to monitor, among other things, the operation of the electricity system as regards the security of electricity supply, under Article 23(2a) of the Energy Law, to prepare a report presenting and assessing the conditions for undertaking and conducting business activities in the field of generation, transmission and distribution of electricity and the fulfilment of the plans referred to in Article 16(2) and (4) (i.e. development plans concerning the satisfaction of current and future demand for gaseous fuels or electricity of the Operators of transmission and distribution systems). The existing powers are expected to be maintained in 2021-2030, i.e. the President of URE will    III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 115  monitor the operation of the electricity system in terms of the security of electricity supply and will prepare a biannual report presenting and assessing the conditions for undertaking and conducting business activities in the field of electricity generation, transmission and distribution and the fulfilment of the plans referred to in Article 16(2) and (4). With respect to the gas sector, the minister responsible for energy will assess, on an annual basis, the security of natural gas supplies. With regard to the natural gas sector, the minister responsible for energy, pursuant to Article 15b of the Energy Law, is obliged to assess annually the security of gaseous fuel supplies, in particular by monitoring a sustainable and continuous supply of natural gas to the country. The results of the assessment are presented in the Report on the results of monitoring the security of gaseous fuel suppliesthe European Commission. Moreover, the minister responsible for energy, as a competent authority within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply and repealing Regulation (EU) No 994/2010, prepares Assessment of risk relating to the security of natural gas supply to Poland (updated every 4 years), as well as preventive action plans and emergency plans (updated every 2 years). 4. Actions to guarantee an appropriate level of flexibility of the electricity system through: - expansion of transmission and distribution networks; - construction of modern generation units with an extensive range of control options; - modernisation of small and medium-sized units (redevelopment of thermal units enabling operation with a minimum technical load of up to 20-30%); - expansion of smart energy networks along with smart metering systems enabling electricity demand to be shifted; - shifting electricity demand from daily peaks to periods of low demand at night (night valleys); - use of system ancillary frequency control services. The changing characteristics of operation of the National Power System (NPS), including in particular the growing share of uncontrollable renewable sources, increasing participation of prosumers and also  in the future  of electric vehicles, accompanied by changes in the development of power demand during the 24 hour cycle, result in the need to implement measures aimed at increasing power system flexibility. Additionally, there are practically no regulating reserve sources in the Polish NPS (except for pumped-storage plants) that would be capable of adjusting the level of production to changes in electricity demand. The implemented measures will contribute to a greater flexibility of the NPS and will enable the transmission system operator and distribution system operators to operate the power system in a secure and effective manner.   market The task will be carried out by making the existing consumer protection mechanisms more efficient, partly also by implementing Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules for the internal market in electricity COM(2016)864 into the Polish legal regime. In this respect,  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 116  new mechanisms will be expanded to protect household consumers. The platform for comparing form, so that end consumers know the components of the electricity fees they pay. At the same time, bills and additional information will be presented more clearly to make them more comprehensible to end consumers. Moreover, the existing alternative dispute resolution methods will be further developed and improved so that end consumers have access to information on available alternative solutions (e.g. spreading payments into installments, advice on debt management) reasonably in advance before the suspension of supplies of electricity or gaseous fuels. 6. Strengthening regulations to increase the activity of household consumers and proposing new legal solutions The task will be carried out by streamlining the existing incentive mechanisms aimed at encouraging consumers to be more active in the electricity market. The task will be partly carried out by implementing Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules for the internal market in electricity into the Polish legal regime. It is expected that new mechanisms will be introduced and the existing ones will be expanded in the period 2021-2030 as part of work on strengthening the legal environment encouraging household consumers to take a more active role in the electricity market. The first solution to be applied will be the introduction of regulations encouraging suppliers to offer dynamic price contracts. The availability of these services will be linked to the popularisation of smart meters. Additionally, regulations encouraging consumers to engage in prosumer activities will be drafted, so that consumers can generate energy as well as store and sell it. In view of the fact that consumers will adopt more active roles, the legal settings will have to be prepared for the development of demand aggregation services, not only at the level of entities with a greater demand for electricity, but also at the level of household consumers. What is more, households may become active in the electricity market not only on an individual basis (as prosumers), but also on a collective basis, for example by becoming involved in setting up local energy communities. Strengthening of the legal environment, which is an additional incentive for the implementation of prosumer investments, will also consist in detailed regulation of technical requirements, grid connection conditions and cooperation of RES micro-installations with the power system. This will be done taking into account the need to increase the share of electricity from microinstallations in the State's energy balance, while ensuring the safety and reliability of the operation of the power system. Moreover, issues such as the registration of metering data, energy balancing, billing of renewables self-consumers and provision of measurement data will be regulated. It should be noted that the detailed regulation of phase-to-phase balancing will bring measurable benefits for the billing of micro-installations and the final balance of energy generated from these installations and that taken from the grid.   b) Measures to increase the flexibility of the power system with regard to renewable energy production Implementation of intraday market coupling mechanisms relating to electricity system balancing   III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 117  such as smart grids, aggregation, DSR, storage, distributed generation, mechanisms for grid traffic dispatching, re-dispatching and curtailment, real-time price signals, including the roll-out of intraday market coupling and cross-border balancing markets. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, URE, power transmission system operator (PSE S.A.) * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. The task will be implemented in accordance with the time schedules specified in the following regulations: - Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 of 24 July 2015 establishing a guideline on capacity allocation and congestion management, - Commission Regulation (EU) 2016/1719 of 26 September 2016 establishing a guideline on forward capacity allocation, - Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2195 of 23 November 2017 establishing a guideline on electricity balancing. The implementation of measures will allow to ensure the security of the national power system while enabling integration in the field of cross-border exchange. An important integration element to be considered when implementing balancing guidelines is the specific nature of the Polish centrally dispatched balancing system. The rules and time schedule for carrying out the task may be changed if an amendment to the EU legislative acts referred to under 1-3 is adopted, which is planned to take effect in 2020. c) If applicable, measures to ensure a non-discriminatory share of renewable energy, DSR and storage, in all energy markets. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, URE * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. Ensuring priority access and transmission of renewable energy or energy from high-efficiency cogeneration on the basis of the Energy Law and the Act on renewable energy sources To meet the target, the Polish legal order contains the rule of priority for connecting installations using renewable energy to the electricity grid (Article 7(1) of the Energy Law), as well as the rule of priority for transmitting and distributing electricity from renewable sources and for cogeneration (Article 9c(6) of the Energy Law). Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of 5 June 2019 on the internal market for electricity has introduced, as of 1 January 2020, capacity limits to which mandatorily applies the principle of priority access to the network. d) Policies and measures to protect consumers, especially vulnerable and, if applicable, energy poor consumers, and to improve the competitiveness and contestability of the retail energy market. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, URE * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. Awareness actions targeted at electricity and gas consumers On-going information actions addressed to electricity and gas consumers, to the extent these tasks are currently carried out by: - operating an Information Centre for electricity and gas consumers, - operating an online energy price calculator, - preparing a Set of Consumer Rights. The President of the Energy Regulatory Office (URE) is engaged in the work aimed at developing standard agreements between suppliers and operators of electricity systems (the so-called general distribution agreements), as well as monitors the retail energy market on an on-going basis. With respect to the improvement of protection of household consumers, mechanisms are currently in place aimed at protecting these consumers, among other things, by URE enabling them to have access to the offer calculator or to alternative dispute resolution methods. Once the calculator has been expanded and billing information has been simplified, household consumers will have an easier and broader access to information about offers and, consequently, more possibilities of deciding whether to switch suppliers. Additionally, due to active forms of participation in the   III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 118  electricity market, e.g. through the use of aggregation services, the undertaking of the prosumer role or the use of dynamic price contracts, becoming more common, they will be able to influence the market to increase competition in it. The aforementioned measures are intended to enhance the position of vulnerable consumers and encourage them to take on a more active role in the electricity market. Expected effects for 2030: - raising awareness among consumers with respect to the rules of operation of the energy and gaseous fuel markets, - activating consumers in the area of electricity supplier switching, among other things by enabling offers to be compared with the use of the online calculator, - strengthening of the position of consumers in the energy and gas markets by raising consumer knowledge on and awareness of rights in their relations with energy companies, - conducting information campaigns to make consumers aware of their rights in their relations with energy companies, - in connection with the timeframe for deregulating gaseous fuel prices in the household sector set out in statutory regulations, an online tool for comparing supplier offers in this segment is planned to provided. e) Description of measures to enable and develop demand response including those addressing tariffs to support dynamic pricing30. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, URE * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. 1. Amendment to transmission network codes which set out the detailed rules for participating in system services on the demand side The development of these rules will be supported by the President of the Energy Regulatory Office (URE) to the extent they meet the proportionality and effectiveness conditions, including cost-proportionality and effectiveness, and to the extent they are based on the implementation of network codes and guidelines developed in the form of EU regulations. Expected effects (2030): - increasing the share of system services of the demand side in the operation of the energy market, - reducing energy shortfalls during peak demand. 2. Development of smart electricity grids The minister responsible for energy prepared a draft amendment to the Energy Law that introduces a smart metering system in Poland. The draft amendment provides for, among other things: - installing, by 2028, remote reading meters for at least 80% of end consumers connected to a distribution network with the rated voltage of no more than 1 kV, in accordance with a specified time schedule; - designating a metering information operator (MIO); - settling the costs of electricity or distribution services on the basis of metering data received from the MIO; - managing the operation of household equipment forming part of the Home Network Infrastructure (the Internet of things) and metering electricity fed into the grid by prosumers; - ensuring the standards of metering data protection against unauthorised access. Benefits deriving from the implementation of the system will include mainly: - a possibility of managing electricity consumption by controlling the system  connecting and    III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 119  disconnecting equipment depending on the time of day and year and the electricity price; - a possibility of using dynamic tariffs offered to consumers; - a possibility of settling consumer costs on the basis of actual consumption data within a time limit and for a settlement period convenient for the parties; - the improvement of the quality parameters of electricity supplied by the provider to the benefit of the consumer and a possibility of applying a discount on account of a failure to meet quality parameters and interruptions in electricity supply; - the simplification and shortening of the procedure of switching electricity suppliers; - an increase in the share of informed electricity consumers which will decrease the system balancing costs and contribute to the final cost of electricity supply; - a decrease in consumer service costs; - the enhancement of competitiveness in the electricity market; - the enabling of the development of distributed electricity sources; - the reduction of peak power demand due to demand side response possibilities; - the reduction of imbalance by decreasing the level of commercial losses (theft); - the reduction of the costs of analyses relating to the determination of the conditions for connection to the grid; - the improvement of the effectiveness of maintenance, renovation and modernisation works. Moreover, the construction of a smart grid is inextricably linked to: advanced power system monitoring technologies, automation, remote control and redevelopment of communication systems in the power industry. The implementation of the Programme is linked directly to measures undertaken as part of the Strategy for Responsible Development. 3.4.4. Energy poverty a) Policies and measures to achieve the objectives set out in 2.4.4. Responsible/involved parties*: MR, Plenipotentiary of the Prime Minister for the Clean Air Programme, MAP, MRPiPS, MK, URE * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. 1. The definition of energy poverty and the development of methodology adapted to Polish conditions The problem of protection of vulnerable consumers against energy poverty has been addressed in the Recommendations of the Council of Ministers Economic Committee (CEC) under the Clean Air Programme. Pursuant to the Programme guidelines, work on the following issues was carried out in 2018: - creating a definition of energy poverty adapted to Polish conditions, - developing a coherent methodology for diagnosing energy poverty and - creating a statistical model necessary to monitor the scale of the phenomenon in Poland. Based on the results of the work, the number of households affected by energy poverty will be determined. Where this figure represents a significant share in terms of the number of households, the most effective tools to reduce energy poverty will be identified. The issue of protection of vulnerable consumers is related to the problem of energy poverty. A vulnerable electricity consumer is defined in the Energy Law (Article 3(13c)) and is entitled to receive a flat-rate energy allowance. The amount of the energy allowance is specified each year by  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 120  the minister responsible for energy and depends on the product of electricity consumption limit and the average electricity price for household consumers. 2. Monitoring the number of households affected by energy poverty Currently (Q4 2019), a report has been accepted that includes recommendations for the definition of energy poverty and a model for measuring and monitoring such poverty. This will enable quantifying the phenomenon of energy poverty. The methodology is based on data from statistical surveys that are updated annually. Depending on the adopted definition of energy poverty (and its related components, e.g. the threshold of energy costs in household disposable income), the target groups eligible for support will be specified. The monitoring of the number of households affected by energy poverty will enable a reliable evaluation of the effects of the proposed solutions. It will make it possible to assess whether the ineffectiveness due to an incorrect assessment of the needs of the poor). 3. Continuation of publicly (including EU) funded programmes and their possible adaptation to the needs of energy poor consumers, in particular loan programmes intended to finance modernisation measures aimed at improving energy efficiency Multi-dwelling residential buildings The national instrument for supporting the improvement of energy efficiency of buildings is governed by the provisions of the Act of 21 November 2008 on supporting thermomodernisation and renovation. Support from the Thermomodernisation and Renovation Fund in the form of a thermomodernisation bonus and a renovation bonus (non-refundable support) is intended for creditworthy entities and is mainly used by housing cooperatives and communities. Over 31,000 bonuses were granted from the Thermomodernisation and Renovation Fund in 2009-2019. The total amount of support granted exceeded PLN 1.7 billion and covered 460,800 dwellings. The value of investments supported under the fund amounted to over PLN 11.1 billion. Work is underway to amend the Act on supporting thermomodernisation and renovation. Such amendments will, amongst others, enable municipalities to apply for support for renovation of municipal buildings (renovations would have to be combined with, for example, the requirement to adapt the building to the current technical conditions concerning thermal insulation and energy efficiency). This is a solution aimed at reducing energy poverty, as municipal buildings often have poor energy standard that translates into high living costs and, at the same time, are inhabited by people with the lowest income. Increased intensity of works in this type of development may, therefore, not only to contribute to the improvement of energy efficiency, but also reduce pollution (through replacement of heat sources) and mitigate the problem of energy poverty (through reduction of heating costs). Single-dwelling buildings According to preliminary research, ca. 60% of energy poor people use single-family dwellings. What is more, a considerable proportion of energy poor people have no creditworthiness. As a result, a considerable proportion of such people are excluded from support programmes. Due to subsidy programmes, energy poor people will be able to carry out the most expensive investment projects (e.g. thermal upgrading), which will contribute to a considerable increase in the    III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 121  efficiency of energy consumption and to a reduction in the share of energy costs in household budgets. In addition to thermomodernisation support programmes, support systems are currently in place for the replacement of heating sources in newly built and existing single-dwpoorest households. Award and payment of support are carried out by local government organisations and coordinated at the level of the national government plenipotentiary. In addition, a thermomodernisation bonus has been in place as of 1 January 2019, offering the possibility of deducing costs of construction materials, equipment and services incurred in connection with a thermomodernisation project in a single-dwelling building from the taxable base. of the Act amending the Act on supporting thermomodernisation and renovation (Journal of Laws 2019, item 51). The programme is targeted at the energy poor living in single-dwelling buildings. The programme is addressed to all municipalities that are able to demonstrate poor air quality in their territory, i.e. concentrations of air pollutants exceeding EU standards. The programme covers the following projects carried out in the above-mentioned households:  replacement of heating devices or systems with those compliant with low-emission standards,  removal of heating devices or systems and connection to the district heating, electricity or gas network,  comprehensive building thermomodernisation. Projects are carried out by the municipality for the benefit of the final beneficiary and financed from public funds up to 100% of their value. The municipality provides an own contribution of 30% (or higher if it has more than 100,000 inhabitants). The remaining part of the Programme (70%) is financed from the State budget via the Thermomodernisation and Renovation Fund. The programme is currently planned to run in 2019- 4. Construction, expansion and upgrading of district heating networks The expansion and upgrading of existing district heating networks towards efficient district heating and cooling systems will have a direct impact on the reduction of areas at risk of energy poverty and will enable an effective fight against low-stack emissions and smog. 5. Monitoring the protection of vulnerable consumers of electricity and gaseous fuels To protect the poorest, the group of vulnerable consumers of electricity and gaseous fuels is defined and the system of support for this group is regulated in an amendment to the Energy Law of 26 July 2013 (Journal of Laws 2013, item 984). A vulnerable consumer of electricity is a person who is granted a housing allowance within the meaning of Article 2(1) of the Act on housing allowances of 21 June 2001 (Journal of Laws of 2017, item 180) and who is eligible for a lump-sum energy allowance. A vulnerable customer of gaseous fuels is defined similarly. The following elements of the support system (as laid down in the Act of 10 April 1997  Energy Law, Journal of Laws 2019, item 1556) have also been introduced:  installation of a prepayment metering and billing system (Article 6f),  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Internal energy market 122   protection against suspension of supplies (Article 6c, 6c(3), 6d),  option to terminate contracts without extra charge (Article 4j(3) and (3a)),  option to change the vendor of electricity or gaseous fuels (Article 4(2)),  access to the collection of consumer rights prepared by the President of URE together with the President of the Office for Competition and Consumer Protection (Article 5(6e)). 6. Anti-smog tariff The aim of the new tariff is to encourage household owners to replace outdated furnaces and heat their homes at night with electricity. The above tariff is set out in the Regulation of the Minister for Energy of 29 December 2017 on detailed rules for the determination and calculation of tariffs and billing in electricity trade that entered into force on 30 December 2017. Following the introduction of the anti-smog tariff and its adjustment by energy companies, the tariff rates for night-time distribution of electricity have been reduced, on average, by 10 times compared to fixed tariff rates (G11). Electricity rates have been reduced, too, as a result of the introduction of the anti-smog tariff. They are 35÷50% lower than the rates in the G11 tariff most commonly used in Poland. The new tariff provides for lower distribution rates for electricity additionally consumed between 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. Lower rates apply to electricity in excess of that consumed in the corresponding period of the previous year. During the remaining hours of the day, the consumer will pay for energy as much as in the G11 tariff, i.e. the most popular tariff among households (with fixed rates throughout the day). Taking into account the above, in all the cases under consideration, the cost of electricity in a household using heat sources powered by electricity is much lower than the cost of heating according to the existing tariffs (G11, G12, G13).  487 contracts were concluded by the end of May 2018. 