  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Internal energy market 37  2.4. Internal energy market The objectives and priority lines related to the internal energy market dimension are set out, in the first place, by the draft Energy Policy of Poland  strategy for the development of the fuel and energy sector (November 2019), as well as by national and EU legislation. 2.4.1. Electricity interconnectivity (2030 framework target) a) The level of electricity interconnectivity that the Member State aims for in 2030 in relation to the October 2014 European Council objective. Increasing the availability and capacity of existing interconnections The interconnection capacity among Member States should be increased primarily by the optimum use of the existing interconnectors and eliminating barriers that block grid access for market participants, including bottlenecks in national systems, i.e. by:  developing rules for the allocation of costs of remedial actions taken to manage network flows,  constructing missing lines within national systems,  optimising the methods of providing market participants with access to those capacities (introduction of FBA methodologies),  installing phase shifters or other devices optimising transmission where necessary. In connection with the above, investments are planned to develop the national transmission network and interconnections by 2030, including: - investments to improve flow in the synchronous area involving Germany, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia; - construction of a new submarine cable connection between Poland and Lithuania (Harmony Link) and completing the synchronisation of the Baltic countries/continental Europe transmission systems involving the Polish transmission system.  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Internal energy market 38    By 2030, the capacity of through the projects planned. Pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the internal market for electricity, from 1 January 2020, TSOs should maximise the interconnection capacity offered for transboundary trade. As a consequence, Regulation 2019/943/EU requires that TSOs provide market participants with cross-zonal capacity at a level not lower than 70% of the transmission capacity for a given border or critical network element/contingency (CNEC) pair, subject to operational remaining 30% for the purposes of reliability margins, loop flows, and internal flows at each critical network element. Providing the 70% of transmission capacity is a challenge for the TSO, as currently, the Polish market suffers from structural network constraints. As a result, a decision has been made to prepare an Action Plan that best responds to the nature of structural network constraints in Poland. With the application of the Action Plan, the deadline for achieving the CEP 70% target is 31 December 2025. The Plan will be implemented from 1 January 2020, with the measures scheduled for four years (1 January 2020 to 31 December 2023). Achieving the target will increase the level of diversification of electricity supply, contribute to the equalisation of wholesale electricity prices in the region, and mitigate the impact of external factors (e.g. prices of CO2 emission allowances  EUA) on the price of electricity in Poland. Additionally, curbing loop flows will improve the availability of existing interconnections for the participants of the National Power System. The subdivision of the bidding zone into two  AT and DE/LU  bidding zones (from October 2018) as a result of the implementation of the ACER Decision of 17 November 2016 establishing the Capacity Calculation Regions (CCR) should produce positive effects. It should be assumed that the above measures will improve the interconnection capacity between Poland and EU Member States. 2.4.2. Energy transmission infrastructure a) Key national objectives for electricity and gas transmission infrastructure that are necessary for the achievement of objectives and targets under any of the dimensions referred to in the Energy Union strategy. 1. The key national objectives concerning electricity transmission infrastructure are as follows: - to safeguard the security of electricity supplies  understood as the capacity of the electricity system to ensure the security of operation of the electrical network and to balance supply with demand;    II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Internal energy market 39    - to ensure long-term capability of the power system to satisfy justified needs as regards domestic and international transmission of electricity, inter alia by expanding the transmission network, and, where applicable, developing interconnections with other power systems. In order to achieve the above objectives, the Transmission System Operator (TSO) is creating a backbone network, which is necessary for the National Power System (NPS) to operate correctly, and at the same time to ensure: - consumer supply reliability, including in large urban agglomerations, by meeting the n-1 supply reliability criteria and network operation quality parameters; - power interconnection and evacuation from existing generation sources and sources under construction, including RES; - fulfilment of the legal requirements concerning the capacity for power exchange  The backbone network enables flexible adaptation to various NPS operation scenarios, even if the role of the transmission network is limited to a reserve function the sole purpose of which is to guarantee system operation security. Polskie Sieci Elektroenergetyczne S.A. (PSE) is planning to develop its transmission network to meet the increasing demand, energy market requirements and the NPS  The development of extra high voltage (EHV) networks will contribute to: - achieving national strategic objectives defined in the energy policy; - integrating the market, inter alia through the development of cross-border interconnections and the reduction of bottlenecks in energy infrastructure; - safeguarding the security of supply, inter alia through interoperability, appropriate connections and secure and reliable system operation; - ensuring sufficient transmission capacity on the basis of the power and electricity demand of particular NPS areas forecast until 2025; - connecting and evacuating power from new generation units based on conventional technologies for which connection conditions have been issued and/or connection agreement have been concluded; - ensuring transmission capacity for connecting and evacuating power installed in wind farms at a level allowing Poland to meet the required RES share ratios in the national energy balance; - reducing unscheduled power flows; - increasing the reliability of supply to major receiving hubs; - increasing the ability to exchange capacity with other systems operating synchronically; - strengthening the role of the transmission system in the NPS through the expansion of the 400 kV network and partial and gradual assumption of transmission functions from the 110 kV distribution network; - increasing voltage control capability; - creating conditions for safe NPS operation while ensuring compatibility between  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Internal energy market 40  energy sources based on different generation technologies and various performance characteristics; - that major network elements can be shut down for maintenance or overhaul, where the shut-down of such elements is difficult given the present form and load of the network; - improving the efficiency of electricity use; - creating a platform for further network expansion (potential development directions). 2. Construction, extension and modernisation of the domestic gas transmission network; The obligation to develop the transmission system ensues from the need to ensure the long-term capability of the gas system to satisfy reasonable gaseous fuel transmission needs in domestic and cross-border trading by extending this system and, where applicable, by expanding interconnections with other gas systems. The length of the transmission network, which was 11 744 km in 2017, does not enable free gas distribution in all directions, as there are bottlenecks in the network. The expansion of the national transmission network is helpful in constructing an integrated and competitive gas market in Central and Eastern Europe. By making use of the geographical location of Poland, the national transmission system may play a new transit role, constituting a regional gas distribution hub. 3. Integration of the national natural gas transmission system with the systems of the Central and Eastern Europe states and the Baltic Sea region At present, Poland is not sufficiently integrated with neighbouring states in terms of the gas transmission system. By 2030, the sources and directions of gas supply to Poland are planned to be diversified by the construction of the Baltic Pipe and expansion of liquefied natural gas receiving capacities on the Polish coast (LNG Terminal in well as by boosting the import-export potential thanks to the planned construction of interconnections with Ukraine, Slovakia, Lithuania, and the Czech Republic. At the end of 2018, there were no high-capacity interconnections with Lithuania, the Czech Republic or Slovakia. b) Where applicable, main infrastructure projects envisaged other than Projects of Common Interest (PCIs)11; 1. Building an interconnector with Ukraine The main purpose of the project is for the Poland-Ukraine interconnection to be able to handle physical gas transmission to Ukraine at 5 billion m3/year and to Poland also at 5 billion m3/year (after 2022). The new interconnection will create a transport corridor ng conditions for increased utilisation of the transmission potential of the Polish transmission system. Initial value (2017): preparatory work. Target value (2030): operational interconnection.  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Internal energy market 41  2.4.3. Market integration a) National objectives related to other aspects of the internal energy market such as market integration and coupling, including a timeframe for when the objectives shall be met The integration of electricity systems requires transmission capacities to be allocated and made available for trading purposes in a coordinated manner, having regard to technical power transmission capabilities in the interconnected systems, as well as the safety and reliability standards concerning system operation to be satisfied. It is necessary to develop and launch coordinated allocation of transmission capacity comprising the countries of Continental Europe (CCR CORE) in accordance with the FBA methodology (flow-based approach)12. Having regard to the above limitations, Poland will pursue its commitments stemming from framework guidelines and codes. Furthermore, Poland will conduct additional actions to roll-out intraday market coupling mechanisms and mechanisms relating to electricity system balancing: - With respect to the prices of electricity of the day-ahead and intraday markets, bid and price limits other than currently applied in the process of uniform, European day-ahead and intraday market coupling have not been applied in Poland since 1 July 2018. The above will not affect the application of the minimum and maximum prices pursuant to Article 41(1) and Article 54(1) of Regulation 2015/1222. - With respect to price limits in the balancing market, from 1 January 2019 onwards, they will be set at a level not lower than that determined for the intraday market. This will not affect the technical price limits in the balancing market, to be applied, if necessary, pursuant to Article 30(2) of the Electricity Balancing Guideline. - Starting from 1 January 2021, prices in the balancing market will be set as the marginal price defined in Article 30(1)(a) of the Electricity Balancing Guideline. This will not affect the possibility of differentiating prices in the Polish bidding zone depending on the location, by applying a solution based on the full transmission network model in the pricing process. If technical price limits are applied in the balancing market, they will take into account the minimum and maximum prices pursuant to Article 30(2) of the Electricity Balancing Guideline.   b) National objectives with regard to ensuring electricity system adequacy, as well as the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production, including a timeframe for when the objectives shall be met; 1. Flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production The low flexibility of the Polish energy market (on the demand and supply sides) is primarily due to the fact that in practice it has no regulating reserve sources (except for pumped-storage power plants) that would be capable of adjusting the production level dynamically depending on demand. Most energy generated in Poland is derived from coal, but at the same time priority in access to the grid is given to renewable energy sources. Given the increase in wind power generation, the full responsibility for balancing variable wind energy generation rests on coal-fired power plants. In such a situation, coal-fired power plants must operate at a load close to technical minimum levels or even shut down units and then immediately switch to operating at full capacity, for which, in fact, they are not    II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Internal energy market 42  technically designed. On top of all this, energy demand is becoming more and more variable, reaching record levels especially in largest agglomerations in peak periods. The improvement of flexibility is a priority which must be seen from the perspective of the entire chain, starting from generation sources, through transmission, distribution, energy market, to energy consumers and the entire demand side. Investments in gas production and transmission infrastructure are key to ensuring the and aggregators capable of responding at times of shortages is bound to grow thanks to the deployment of smart networks. In the long term, the development of demand side response (DSR), energy storage, and energy clusters, which should be capable of self-balancing, may also gain in importance. The flexibility of system operation is expected to improve by 2030, so that it can respond adequately to changing electricity demand levels and the increased share of uncontrollable energy sources.   2. Development and use of offshore wind energy potential in Poland in the 2030 perspective. The potential for the wind offshore sector in Poland in the Baltic Sea offers realistic opportunities for its development after 2025. To make it possible to evacuate full capacity generated by the offshore wind sector, the transmission network needs to be modernised and expanded, which is required in addition to providing electricity network elements necessary for applying voltage and for connection purposes. Such modernisation/expansion of the transmission network has already been envisaged by PSE S.A. in the Transmission Grid Development Plan and scheduled for completion. Ensuring the adequacy of the power system and the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production in the context of market integration is a process which, by definition, engages a larger number of entities. Therefore, seting national objectives in this respect is not reasonable. The reason for this is that their achievement will depend on other entities engaged in the process. At present, the development of RES, in particular offshore wind farms, is part of the planned deployment of renewable energy sources in Poland. Given the need to ensure adequate offshore energy storage and transmission capacities, the existing offshore wind potential in the Baltic Sea does not make it possible for the technology to be developed and used by 2025. Until then, the expansion of individual local RES sources must be correlated with the retrofitting of traditional generation units and the modernisation of the power infrastructure that can be used for delivering Polish offshore wind energy to end users. The anticipated effect in 2030 will be approx. 3.8 GW of installed offshore capacity, which is expected to grow to approx. 8 GW in 2040.   c) National objectives to protect energy consumers and improve the 1. Raising the awareness of consumers and encouraging them to play a more active  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Internal energy market 43  competitiveness of the retail energy sector. role in the energy market; Measures to enhance end consumer knowledge are planned to be continued in the period 2021-2030, with a focus on: - consumer rights (relating to the conclusion of contracts, supplier switching, alternative dispute resolution methods), - an active role in the energy market (prosumer, use of aggregation services, smart meters, dynamic price contracts).   2. Gas market liberalisation  tariff deregulation in the gas trading sector A number of measures have been undertaken in recent years to stimulate the development of competition in the Polish natural gas market. The amendment to the Energy Law of 26 July 2013 introduced a gas exchange obligation to enable the creation of a liquid, wholesale natural gas market in Poland and to make the  The President of the Energy Regulatory Office (URE), by issuing individual decisions, releases entities which have filed appropriate applications from the obligation to submit tariffs for approval with respect to natural gas trading: at a commodity exchange, in a wholesale gas market and in LNG and CNG form, and the sale of natural gas to gas system operators in order for them to carry out their duties. As a result of a further amendment to the Energy Law, gas prices for trading companies were deregulated in December 2016 with respect to the sale: in a wholesale market, at a virtual point (including at a commodity exchange), of compressed natural gas (CNG) and liquefied natural gas (LNG), and by tender procedure, auction or public procurement. On 1 October 2017, prices for all remaining consumers were deregulated, except for household consumers. Natural gas prices for household consumers will continue to be regulated by the President of the Energy Regulatory Office by 31 December 2023 (as per Article 62b of the Energy Law). The deregulation of natural gas prices for particular consumer groups will enable a far-reaching liberalisation of the gas market and the development of competition in the gas trading sector.   3. Development of a competitive gas market in Poland The number of instances of supplier switching is a simple and reliable measure of the development of a competitive gas market. Pursuant to the TPA (Third Party Access) principle, which is regulated by Article 4(2) of the Energy Law, end consumers may use tfrom any supplier. Several important factors affect the freedom of choice of the supplier, e.g.: the degree of awareness of customers and their motivation to switch supplier, as well as facility to switch suppliers or the number of competitive offers available on the market. The number of instances of natural gas supplier switching is expected to rise in connection with the development of the retail gas market. According to the information provided by the President of the Energy Regulatory Office, the level of the natural gas supplier switching indicator among consumers reached 66  II. National objectives and targets - Dimension Internal energy market 44  889 in 2017. The number of instances of natural gas supplier switching is expected to reach 150,000 by 2030. 2.4.4. Energy poverty a) National objectives with regard to energy poverty including a timeframe for when the objectives shall be met. 1. Reduction of energy poverty having regard to the protection of vulnerable social groups A comprehensive state policy oriented towards solving the problem of energy poverty is planned to be developed. An effect of the proposed comprehensive public policy will be the reduction of energy poverty and the enhancement of the protection of vulnerable consumers.   2. Protection of vulnerable consumers of electricity by granting a flat-rate energy allowance In order to protect the poorest people, Amendment to the Energy Law of 26 July 2013 (Journal of Laws 2013, item 984) defines a vulnerable electricity consumer and a vulnerable gaseous fuel consumer. It puts in place a system of support for vulnerable electricity consumers in the form of an energy allowance. The number of vulnerable electricity and gaseous fuel consumers is expected to fall by 2030. 