  I. National objectives and targets - Dimension Energy security 32  2.3. Energy security The objectives and priority lines related to the energy security dimension are set out by sectoral development strategies, primarily by:  Draft Polish Energy Policy  strategy for the development of the fuel and energy sector (November 2019).  sectoral programmes. The above strategies identify the entities responsible for the implementation of individual activities and define the funding framework. a) National targets concerning greater diversification of energy sources and supplies from third countries which may contribute to reducing energy import dependency. 1. Deployment of nuclear power in Poland The first unit (with a capacity of ca. 1-1.5 GW) of the first nuclear power plant is expected to be commissioned in 2033, with another five units to be launched at 2-3-year intervals (with a total capacity of approx. 6-9 GW). The deployment of nuclear power will make it possible for Poland to satisfy the increasing electricity demand, will enhance the diversification of energy sources and will help to reduce national greenhouse gas emissions and dust and gas emissions. Nuclear power plants are a stable and reliable source of energy and will form a foundation of the national power system, which will strengthen electricity security in the long term. Nuclear energy will be deployed along the lines of actions envisaged by the updated  b) National objectives with regard to reducing energy import dependency from third countries. 2. Reduction of the share of coal in electricity generation to 56-60% in 2030 At present, the share of coal and lignite in electricity generation in Poland is ca. 77%. Owing to the decommissioning of end-of-life generation units, the need to meet strict environmental requirements, and the growingly difficult market situation (mainly the rise in CO2 emission allowance prices), the share of coal in electricity generation will be decreasing gradually. In view of the fact that stable and reliable energy supplies contributing to energy security need to be guaranteed, and that it is appropriate to maintain a high level of energy independence  coal will remain the basic fuel in the electricity sector until 2030. In this respect, the optimisation of the production and use of this raw material must be ensured. 3. Expansion of electricity generation capacity to satisfy demand for power At present, the level of conventional generation capacity satisfies peak power demand. Owing to the expected increase in demand for energy and power, in spite of the development of interconnections, generation and transmission infrastructures need to be expanded to safeguard electricity supplies to consumers. With respect to the development of electricity generation infrastructure until 2030, the share of RES is expected to increase from 14% at present to ca. 32%. Gas-based generation capacities will be developed in connection with the need to guarantee backup sources for weather-dependent RES, also on the basis of sources alternative to gas imported from third countries, e.g. methane from mines used for gas mixtures, synthesis gas, biogas, hydrogen. Energy storage technologies, especially those for storing renewable energy will be developed. In order to satisfy the increasing demand, in a situation of substantial decommissioning  I. National objectives and targets - Dimension Energy security 33  of power generation units, a capacity market has been implemented as an incentive for investments aimed at safeguarding the reliability of supplies. This mechanism will be crucial for expanding current generation capacities, but other market processes will also play a role in shaping the final balance.   4. Diversification of crude oil supplies and expansion of oil and liquid fuel infrastructure Provision of existing crude oil and liquid fuel storage facilities, along with the accompanying infrastructure, with technical capacities for extruding raw material/fuels within a time limit enabling the raw material to be quickly supplied to the refinery and fuels to be delivered to the market Further diversification of crude oil import requires expanding the internal infrastructure so that the import of the raw material by sea may be increased. In the course of further development of the market, the possibility of increasing the level of storage and separation of various grades of oil imported by sea and efficient and safe transmission within the country must be ensured. The main objective is to ensure uninterrupted crude oil supplies to Polish refineries and to supply liquid fuels to the market at a level ensuring its normal operation in a crisis situation. Adding importance to sea transport is crucial for diversifying the supply of oil to Polish refineries. For these reasons, the construction of the second leg of the Pomorski pipeline by 2023 is legitimate. The need to ensure reliable fuel supplies to the market requires maintaining appropriate crude oil and fuel storage capacities. In this context, appropriate framework must exist, such as to guarantee optimum conditions for investing in storage infrastructure. With respect to the existing infrastructure, it must be guaranteed that all storage facilities operating in Poland have adequate technical capacities for oil to be quickly delivered to refineries and fuels to the market. Such conditions are necessary to ensure that the market functions effectively and that reserves are fully available at times of crisis. The purpose of measures to be undertaken until 2030 is to ensure the continuity of fuel production by domestic refineries and uninterrupted supplies of fuels to the market should a crisis situation occur. In 2018, the physical availability of fuels in storage facilities was 90 days both for aboveground and underground storage, while for crude oil, it was 90 days for aboveground storage and 150 days for underground storage. In 2024, the physical availability of fuel reserves in storage is planned to be 90 days for aboveground and underground storage. That for crude oil will also be 90 days for both aboveground and underground storage.     5. Diversification of sources and directions of natural gas supply and ensuring more possibilities of sourcing gas from markets alternative to the eastern market; The directions and sources of gas supply will be further diversified through the implementation of key projects, including the construction of the Baltic Pipe, expansion of the capacity to receive liquefied natural gas on the Polish coast, and development of interconnections with neighboring countries.  I. National objectives and targets - Dimension Energy security 34    6. Maintenance of the natural gas production level in Poland and attempts to increase it with the use of innovative hydrocarbon extraction methods In 2016, natural gas output in Poland was ca. 4.2 billion m3 (as measured by methane-rich gas equivalent), whereas its output from mine demethylation and from offshore fields was 240 million m3 (methane-rich gas equivalent). As at the end of 2016, recoverable deposits of developed natural gas fields amounted to 98.9 billion m3, which accounts for 81% of the total volume of recoverable resources. Industrial natural gas deposits amounted to 52.3 billion m3 in 2016. The main objective for 2030 in the segment is to maintain stable gas production, to continue exploration for new fields to replace depleted ones, as well as to increase output efficiency. In 2017, the output, as measured by methane-rich gas equivalent, was ca. 4 billion m³ annually. The output is expected to remain at a similar level in 2030. Imports will continue to be the main method for meeting natural gas demand.   7. Development of electromobility and alternative fuels in transport Heavy dependency on imported crude oil supplies requires an active policy also in the field of the management of demand for oil-derived fuels. Achieving the above objectives will be based on the promotion of alternative fuels in transport. A support instrument in this respect is the Act on electromobility and alternative fuels. The Act is aimed at stimulating the development and electromobility, and the use of other alternative fuels (natural gas in the form of LNG and CNG, LPG, liquid biofuels, hydrogen, as well as synthetic and paraffinic fuels) in transport. Dependency on crude oil imports will be reduced by increasing the use of cars powered by alternative fuels, including electric cars, and by expanding infrastructure (including core networks) for charging electric cars and CNG/LNG refuelling in the transport sector. The development of fuel cell electric vehicles contributes significantly to the decarbonisation of transport, which is currently based mainly on diesel and gasoline. Nowadays, e-mobility highly reduces emissions from transport, but when planning to decarbonise this branch completely, efforts should be taken to promote zero-emission vehicles, including hydrogen-powered ones. It is worth emphasising that the potential for using hydrogen should not only be sought in road transport, but also in rail, air and maritime transportation.     8. Maintenance of autonomy as regards electricity imports from third countries Poland expects to remain independent of electricity imports from third countries until 2030. The National Power System (NPS) is interconnected by the following transboundary lines with third countries: - single-circuit 750 kV Rzeszów-Chmielnicka (Ukraine) line, (inactive since the 1980s); - single--Dobrotwór (Ukraine) line; - double--operation);    I. National objectives and targets - Dimension Energy security 35  Since 2011, electricity has been imported to Poland from third countries only through one -Dobrotwór one, in volumes not exceeding 0.7% of the access to transmission capacity is provided on the basis of monthly tender procedures. c) National objectives with regard to readiness to cope with constrained or interrupted supply of an energy source (including gas and electricity) and, where appropriate, a timeframe for when the objectives shall be met10. 1. Diversification of natural gas supply sources and directions and improvement of the possibilities of gas supply from directions alternative to the eastern direction  objectives defined in 2.3.(a) item 5. Pursuant to national legislation adopted, until 2022 the share of natural gas imported by energy companies from a single source in a given calendar year may reach a maximum of 70%. From 2023 onwards, this share may not exceed 33%. The above limits do not apply to intra-Community purchases. 2. Maintenance of the natural gas production level in the territory of Poland and attempts to increase it with the use of innovative hydrocarbon extraction methods  objectives described in 2.3.(a) item 6. 3. Maintenance, as far as necessary from the point of view of the energy security of Poland, of non-market-based measures within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2017 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply and repealing Regulation (EU) No 994/2010 In the event of an exceptionally high gas demand, major supply disruptions or other severe deterioration in the gas supply, and in the event that all relevant market measures have been implemented, but the supplies of gas are insufficient to meet the remaining gas demand, non-market-based measures need to be additionally deployed with a view, in particular, to safeguarding supplies of gas to protected customers. Depending on how the situation is assessed and what measures need to be deployed to eliminate the supply disruption, mandatory reserves may be released or restrictions on natural gas consumption imposed. d) National objectives with regard to deployment of domestic energy sources (notably renewable energy). 1. Enhancement of the possibilities of gas supply from directions alternative to the eastern direction and maintenance of the natural gas output level in the territory of Poland, and attempts to increase it with the use of innovative hydrocarbon extraction methods  objectives defined in 2.3.(a) items 5 and 6. 2. Development of energy sustainable areas at the local level Safeguarding energy security requires the diversification of sources, raw materials and energy generation and distribution methods. With respect to electricity, this requires developing energy sources balanced with demand by tapping the national potential, with only partial back-up from interconnections. The right choice of renewable and other energy sources for energy clusters, energy cooperatives etc. may ensure local self-sufficiency and thus also energy security. It is expected that 300 energy sustainable areas will be created by 2030 locally (energy  I. National objectives and targets - Dimension Energy security 36  clusters, energy cooperatives etc.). 3. Inventory of the national uranium deposits (conventional and non-conventional), including the exploration of deposits and analyses of their recovery possibilities in technical and economic terms (i.e. whether and on what terms it would be viable) until 2030 The analyses conducted so far show that Poland does not have industrial quantities of uranium in conventional deposits, but there is unconventional deposit potential (e.g. in ashes, copper mining waste). Their exploitation requires a detailed inventory of conventional and unconventional deposits and technical and economic analyses of the possibilities of using them for national industry purposes, including nuclear energy generation. The appraisal of the size of potential uranium deposits, in particular unconventional ones, is planned to be conducted by 2030, along with the assessment of the possibilities of recovering uranium, including of using it commercially, for the production of nuclear fuel for Polish nuclear power plants.   4. Maintenance of domestic coal production at a level enabling the satisfaction of the demand of the energy sector Domestic coal is the basic electricity, heat and coke production carrier. The Polish energy sector relies on coal, with the share of electricity produced from coal/lignite amounting to 77% of all electricity produced nationwide in 2018 and that produced from hard coal to about 48%. The share of primary coal-derived energy consumption in primary energy consumption amounts to ca. 39%. For the above reasons coal will continue to determine the nature of the broad energy market in Poland for many years to come. There is a need to guarantee the greatest possible rationality of the recovery and use of coal to ensure reliable supplies of the resource for the purposes of the energy, heat and coke markets. At the same time, the sector should also ensure supplies to the small- and individual-consumer market, inter alia through newly created and expanded distribution networks, with the product range and quality offer to be characterised by a growth in the production and supply of higher value-added types of coal, i.e. medium-sized and coarse coal and qualified low-carbon fuels. Demand for coal will be met by domestic resources whereas imported coal will be treated as supplementary. The planned measures are oriented to ensuring cost-effectiveness of the coal mining sector, rational management of opened deposits, reasonable distribution of the resource, use or sale of mining by-products (methane, hydrogen, minerals), and innovative extraction and utilisation methods. In the context of the decreasing role of coal, preparing a crucial.   None 