 III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 94  3.3. Energy security23 a) Policies and measures to achieve the objectives set out in 2.324 Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, URE, Government Plenipotentiary for Strategic Energy Infrastructure, companies operating in the energy sector * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. 1. Implementation of the Energy Policy of Poland until 2040 (EPP2040) The objective of the energy policy outlined in the draft EPP2040 is energy security while ensuring the competitiveness of the economy, energy efficiency and reduction of the impact of the energy sector on the environment, as well as the optimum use of own energy resources. Energy security is the priority component of the aforementioned objective. Actions carried out along eight strategic lines described in detail in the draft EPP2040 will lead to  2. Implementation of the Polish Nuclear Power Programme (Program polskiej energetyki  PPEJ) The draft Energy Policy of Poland until 2040 envisages the implementation of nuclear power programme. The first unit (with a capacity of ca. 1-1.5 GW) of the first nuclear power plant is planned intervals. The installed capacity in nuclear power units is expected to reach ca. 6-9 GW. In the case of Poland, infrastructure necessary for the development and operation of the nuclear power sector (legal, organisational and institutional infrastructure, scientific and research backup facilities, personnel training systems) must be built in order for nuclear power programme to be implemented. An exhaustive diagnosis of individual issues relevant to the development of the nuclear power sector has been presented in the Polish Nuclear Power Programme (PPEJ), which is due to be updated soon. PPEJ is a strategic document which sets out the objectives, stages (milestones) and tools (legal, organisational, financial), as well as entities implementing nuclear power projects in Poland. The milestones in the period 2021-2030 include: - selection of technologies by 2021; - commencement of the construction of the nuclear part (first nuclear concrete placement) by 2024.   3. Implementation of the Programme for the Coal Mining Sector in Poland 2016-2030 The objective of the Programme for the Coal Mining Sector in Poland is to create conditions conducive to building a profitable, effective and modern coal mining sector based on cooperation, knowledge and innovation, which, while operating in a friendly and predictable policy and legal setting, enables an effective use of resources and the social and economic capital to safeguard   A restructuring plan for hard coal and lignite mining areas, with support from EU funds, will be prepared in 2020. 4. Implementation of the Programme for the Lignite Mining Sector in Poland Lignite resources in the currently exploited deposits enable a stable level of production and the operation of production complexes only until approximately 2030.  A restructuring plan for hard coal and lignite mining areas, with support from EU funds, will be prepared in 2020.  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 95  CO2 emission allowance prices and the emergence of new technologies will play a key role in the development of new deposits. Innovations are to contribute to the implementation of low-carbon technologies and an alternative use of lignite. Gasified raw material (synthesis gas) is characterised by lower emissions and its use may be synchronised with demand. Due to its characteristics, lignite lends itself to gasification and, in the long term, also to hydrogenation for the production of liquid fuels. Synthesis gas may be used to generate energy and heat, but also to produce synthetic petrol and many other chemical products.   5. Monitoring the market in terms of compliance with the Regulation of the Council of Ministers of 24 April 2017 regarding the minimum diversification level of natural gas supplies from abroad. Pursuant to the provisions of the aforementioned regulation, the product to be diversified is imported gas, with diversification to be achieved with the use of the transmission infrastructure on interconnections with other countries. This refers to gas imported to Poland from non-EU and non-EFTA countries, with supplies from non-EU countries by land (with the use of gas pipeline networks) to be treated in aggregate. The application of such a structure is justified by the fact that, at present, all gas supplies through entry points from non-EU countries are carried out from the East, in view of which they should be subject to the diversification obligation in aggregate. Also gas imported in any other form will be subject to diversification. This includes CNG and LNG imports, with the exclusion  The percentage thresholds specified in the aforementioned Regulation of the Council of Ministers take into account the long-term contractual commitments of the natural gas sector companies existing at the time of adoption of the Regulation. Setting the threshold at 33% after 2022 is justified by similar regulations in other EU Member States and by the need to diversify sources of natural gas supplies to Poland. The expected outcome is primarily an increase in the level of the security of natural gas supplies and the enhancement of competition on the domestic natural gas market. 6. Performance of tasks relating to the security of natural gas supplies as specified in the Preventive Action Plan and the Emergency Plan (prepared by the Ministry of Energy in connection with the fulfilment of the obligations set out in EU regulations). The Preventive Action Plan contains proposals for measures which will contribute to the improvement of the energy security of Poland in the natural gas sector. The preventive measures specified in the aforementioned document are consistent with the recommendations of the International Energy Agency. Entities carrying out the measures specified in the Preventive Action Plan are obliged to submit quarterly reports to the Minister for Energy on carrying out measures aimed at improving the security of natural gas supplies. The reports include the schedule of works, the expected date of completing an investment project, the risks for the implementation of the investment project identified by the entity responsible for carrying it out and its impact on the emergency scenarios identified in the Preventive Action Plan. Additionally, by 1 September of each year, the transmission system operator, in consultation with entities transporting natural gas into the territory of Poland, is obliged to prepare a report concerning    III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 96  the preparation of the gas system for the winter season, including an analysis of the coverage of the peak natural gas demand in non-fault conditions. The aforementioned measures are aimed at ensuring continuous and uninterrupted natural gas supplies to consumers. 7. Construction of a direct connection between gas fields in the Norwegian Continental Shelf and expansion (increasing offtake and regasification capacities) of the LNG terminal in  Within the framework of measures relating to the diversification of natural gas supply directions and sources, the following projects are carried out: the construction of the Baltic Pipe, the expansion of  the Gulf  The following targets are expected to be achieved by 2030: - 2022: an operational two-way connection between Poland, via Denmark, and the fields located in the Norwegian Continental Shelf, which will enable the import of ca. 10 billion m3 of natural gas; - billion m3 annually (to be possibly further expanded depending on market conditions), along with additional functions enabling vessel bunkering and LNG transshipment to rail, vessels and tank trucks in increased quantities. - 2025: the construction of the FSRU  the first phase of construction ensuring the capacity of at least 4.5 billion m3.  8. Construction of a transmission system enabling natural gas supplies from the north, west and south, and the construction of system interconnections to meet the requirement to diversify supply sources The current capacities of transmission infrastructure do not allow the full substitutability of natural gas supply sources in the event of supply disruptions. The investment will make it possible to increase natural gas supplies from new directions (LNG, Norwegian Continental Shelf, system interconnections). Expansion of interconnections with neighbouring countries, along with the development of the national transmission network and the expansion of gas storage facilities, is an element of the natural gas supply diversification strategy, which at the same time will create conditions for market development and the growth of the importance of Poland as a regional gas trading hub. Currently, apart from supplies to the LNG terminal, gas supplied to Poland includes mainly Russian gas brought via Belarus and Ukraine, as well as supplies from the territory of Germany and the Czech Republic. To increase import and export capacities, Poland will aim at constructing or expanding interconnections with: - Slovakia  up to an import capacity of 5.7 billion m3 and an export capacity of 4.7 billion m3 annually (by 2021); - Lithuania (GIPL)  up to an import capacity of 1.9 billion m3 and an export capacity of 2.4 billion m3 annually (by 2021);  Czech Republic (Stork II)  up to an import capacity of 6.5 billion m3 and an export capacity of 5  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 97  billion m3 annually (by 2022); - Ukraine  up to import and export capacities of 5 billion m3 annually (by 2022). 9. Expansion of natural gas storage capacities, as well as capacities for natural gas offtake and injection to underground storage (UGS) facilities in Poland In Poland, the overall capacity of underground storage facilities exceeds 3 billion m3 with an offtake capacity below 50 million m3/day. The total available working gas volume of underground high-methane gas storage facilities in the 2017/2018 season is 2,985.4 million m3. In addition to the aforementioned high-methane gas storage facilities, two high-nitrogen gas storage facilities managed by PGNiG S.A. are in operation, namely: - UGS Daszewo with a capacity of 40 million m3; - UGS Bonikowo with a capacity of 200 million m3. The high-nitrogen gas system is a closed system and the aforementioned high-nitrogen storage facilities are used to stabilise production. It is advisable to continue the development of storage facilities as part of the UGS Working Volume Development Scheme that consists in the construction of the Kosakowo Covern Underground Storage Facility (CUGS) with the aim of stabilising the supply of gaseous fuels to the Tricity-Koszalin areas. Once the expansion process is completed, the working gas volume of CUGS Kosakowo will be a minimum of 250 million m3. The completion of the investment project is planned in 2021. At present, CUGS Kosakowo has a working gas volume of 145.5 million m3. -System S.A. (OGP Gaz-system S.A.) is analysing the possibility of expanding its operations to include underground gas storage in accordance with its 2016-2025 strategy. The baseline scenario is the construction of a storage facility pality) in the Kujawsko-being an alternative location. Other gas storage expansion projects are also under consideration, such as UGS Wierzchowice or CUGS Mogilno. The expected effects of the measures by 2030 include, if sufficient internal and external funding is obtained, an increase in the capacity of underground gas storage facilities to a minimum of 4 billion m3 by the 2030/2031 winter season and an increase in maximum offtake capacity from the current 48.7 million m3 per day to a minimum of 60 million m3 per day. The implementation of the construction projects concerning new underground gas storage facilities and the expansion of existing ones will considerably contribute to the energy security through an increase in storage capacities which may be used to maintain commercial stocks for balancing and emergency purposes.  10. Implementation of investment plans and strategies of companies with State Treasury shareholding in accordance with the Policy of the Government of the Republic of Poland for Logistic Infrastructure in the Oil Sector -importance to safeguarding the energy security of the Republic of Poland. The current transmission infrastructure of the Pomeranian section, in spite of comprising a reversible-flow pipeline, constitutes   III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 98  a single artery only and is the weakest link of the crude oil pipeline transport system due to the fact that it is not substitutable by other logistic infrastructure. This is why it is appropriate and necessary to aim at creating redundancy infrastructure, which will constitute an additional security measure for crude oil transport in the Pomeranian section. A single pipeline makes it impossible to meet the e up in this section of the pipeline, there is a risk of prolonged stoppage in crude oil injection and, consequently, of destabilisation of the chain logistics of supplies to the most important Polish refinery. Baseline value (2017): Three-element infrastructure for crude oil transmission, comprising the Friendship Pipeline (Eastern Section  240 km, Western Section  416 km) and the Pomeranian Pipeline (235 km) Expected effects (2030): Expansion of crude oil transmission infrastructure  construction of the - 11. Development of regulations concerning crude oil and petroleum product stocks To ensure an efficient emergency stock system in Poland, legal regulations must be amended to increase the role of the Agency of Stocks Reserves in building up, maintaining and financing (through the stock fee system) emergency stocks. Producers and traders build up and maintain mandatory stocks of crude oil or fuel, with the exclusion of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), in quantities corresponding to the product of 53 days and the average daily output of fuels or the imports of crude oil or fuels by the producer or trader in the preceding calendar year. The optimisation of crude oil and fuel emergency stock system management should be achieved by lessening the administrative burden resting on producers and traders obliged to build up and maintain obligatory crude oil and fuel stocks.  12. Development of the rules for electricity market operation Lessons learned from the operation of a single-commodity market and theoretical studies concerning -commodity electricity market where there is no missing money problem resulting subsequently in the missing capacity problem, is a difficult task. This concerns both the substantive solutions and the acceptance of periodically high electricity prices, or even restrictions on electricity supplies. The problem is made worse by support systems used in Europe on a large scale in relation to some generation technologies, which currently, due to the lack of developed energy storage technologies, cannot safeguard the security of supplies. In connection with the results of analyses concerning the assessment of capacity adequacy, which clearly show that there is a threat to the security of electricity supplies in Poland over the next years, a decision has been taken to implement a capacity market in order to have an effective tool in place for safeguarding the security of supplies. The efficiency of operation of the electricity market depends largely on solutions adopted on the balancing market and the system services market. The balancing market ensures that the energy demand and generation are balanced on an on-going basis, while at the same time the energy supply security criteria are met. The energy prices on this market are reference prices for forward markets (bilateral and exchange prices) and for spot markets (day-ahead and intraday), since they reflect the   III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 99  value of energy at the time of its supply. The system services market makes it possible to ensure short-term excess capacity in the system with specific technical parameters, maintained for the purpose of balancing the electricity system. Prices of balancing energy from reserve capacity show, in the first place, balancing tensions (reserve shortfall leads to an increase in prices), which generates investment signals by influencing prices. The prices of individual system services create incentives for the development of sources with specific technical abilities, which support the safe operation of the electricity system, such as the ability to quickly increase or reduce the quantity of generated electricity, in accordance with the current demand, or the ability to operate with a broad range of loads. For the above reasons, correct pricing processes in the balancing market and in the system services market are an important factor affecting the quality of operation of market mechanisms in the electricity sector. The following measures are underway in Poland to improve the efficiency of operation of the electricity market: - ancillary frequency control services  changes are aimed at applying market mechanisms for obtaining reserve capacity (system services) which generate pricing signals for the development of sources necessary to balance the system in an effective manner and at the same time assume an increase in prices of reserve capacity when it is in deficit;  balancing energy pricing mechanism  changes are aimed at applying a pricing mechanism based on offers actually used to generate electricity, which at the same time reflects various energy values in particular system locations due to restrictions on available network resources. By applying this approach, appropriate pricing incentives will be created for market participants to counteract short-term balancing difficulties in the system; - development of consumer participation in the balancing market  changes are aimed at expanding consumer participation by enabling consumers to offer both energy supplies and system services (reserve capacity). When offering their services, consumers should be able to define the specific reduction parameters, such as the time of activating a reduction, the maximum and minimum reduction period and level, intervals between subsequent reductions etc. Such a solution will ensure conditions for maximizing the available volume of consumer load reduction and its effective use by the system operator for system balancing purposes. The above-mentioned measures are carried out as part of a broader project aimed at implementing advanced tools for managing the operation of the national electricity system in market conditions (Market Management System  MMS), enabling its operation to be optimised with the use of precise technical and cost models and techniques of allowing for uncertainties caused by unstable sources.  13. Introduction of a capacity market as a solution ensuring the sufficiency of generation in a medium- and long-term perspective The main goal of the capacity market is to safeguard the security of electricity supplies to end consumers in a long-term perspective. The capacity market is a market mechanism whose objective is to safeguard the required level of security of energy supplies while minimizing costs for the economy. The capacity market is neutral in technological terms, as a result of which it creates a level playing field for all electricity generation technologies, energy storage facilities and DSR (Demand Side    III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 100  Response)25, taking into account the degree in which particular technologies contribute to safeguarding the security of supplies and provided that the requirements set out in the Act on the capacity market of 8 December 2017 are met. The capacity market rewards capacity market units which supply capacity in risk periods, that is in periods in which the risk of losing the continuity of supplies in the National Power System (NPS) has been identified. The capacity market operates in parallel to the electricity market and does not introduce restrictions on pricing processes in the electricity market  prices are formed on the basis of the relationship between electricity demand and supply. The capacity market is a commodity derivatives market, where physical delivery of capacity is carried out after the main trading processes are completed. The primary market has the form of auctions with the transmission system operator (TSO) as the only buyer. The primary market consist of the main auction that will take place in the fifth year before the delivery period and additional auctions that will take place in the year preceding the year to which the delivery periods relate. There is the secondary market to complement the primary market by enabling the reduction of risks borne by the capacity market participants, at which capacity obligations of certified capacity market units are traded in. The capacity market is an additional market mechanism complementary in relation to the energy market: - it creates conditions for the stable operation of existing generation sources and their repowering, as long as these sources are necessary to safeguard the security of supplies; - it ensures clear pricing signals aimed at coordinating decisions to construct new generation capacities, as well as to decommission specific generation resources; - it limits the investment cycle phenomenon that can be observed in energy prices for end consumers on a single-commodity electricity market, since decisions to invest in or to decommission resources are coordinated by the capacity market; - it creates conditions for developing DSR services, both through the participation of the DSR in capacity market processes and through the provision of DSR services at the facilities of industrial consumers in order to reduce their peak power demand and thus to reduce the operation costs of the capacity market. In 2018 and 2019, the first four main auctions were conducted on the capacity market for delivery years: 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024. The capacity market mechanism will be modified in view of the provisions of Article 22 of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the internal market for electricity, which prevent units emitting more than 550 g/kWh of carbon dioxide from receiving payments and commitments under the capacity market from 1 July 2025. Work will be carried out to amend the Capacity Market Act in order to bring it into line with EU regulations, while continuing to ensure security of electricity supply to end consumers. 14. Measures to ensure flexibility of the power system in line with the anticipated changes in the NPS. Due to an increased use of weather-dependent renewable energy sources and the need to ensure availability of back-up sources for electricity generation, it is necessary to introduce measures for the  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 101  flexibility of the power system. Some of these measures have already been implemented by means of programmes for Demand Side Reduction (DSR) units, which are being developed by the transmission system operator (TSO) and through the capacity market. Special attention should be paid to the capacity market, which allows DSR units and energy storage facilities to participate in auctions. Nearly 3,200 MW of DSR units and energy storage facilities obtained capacity contracts through auctions in 2018 and 2019. Nevertheless, an analysis would be warranted to address potential barriers to emergency gas sources. Moreover, the new regulations will introduce a legal framework for the operation of the smart metering system, which will have an impact on the flexibility of the power system. As regards the smart metering system, remote reading meters for at least 80% of end consumers connected to the distribution network with the rated voltage of no more than 1 kV are planned to be installed by the end of 2028. 15. Identification of barriers and support for the development of energy sustainable areas at the local level. Barriers to the implementation of local investments, in particular those resulting from the lack of social acceptance for the development of dispersed power generation, will be identified together with their causes. The analysis will concern the lack of acceptance for the development of, for example, wind power plants, agricultural biogas plants, biomass-fired thermal power plants, etc. Steps will be taken to address concerns and possibly carry out measurements of noise, odours or other nuisance factors associated with power facilities with the aim of encouraging local communities to change their negative attitude towards investment projects. The results of measurements will be communicated to local communities as they are released. b) Regional cooperation in this area. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, MSZ * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. 1. Co-operation within the framework of the Visegrad Group (V4) Co-operation on the following issues is planned in the period 2021-2030 among the Visegrad Group states: - joint position within the European Union on the directions of development for the energy sector, - scientific research and development cooperation, - experience sharing in the area of development of the energy sector, including cooperation with the particular technology suppliers, in particular nuclear power suppliers. 2. Market integration Initiative Technical Group on Flexibility (SG III). Poland declares its further participation in the work of the aforementioned groups and its involvement in creating an appropriate framework for further market integration. Poland expects that the continuation of the above-described measures will result in the achievement of market integration targets through an agreement among EU Member States on matters concerning the elimination of all barriers restricting flexibility in the areas of generation, demand side involvement and development of spot and balancing markets at the level of Member States and at the regional and European Union-wide levels. 3. Co-operation with EU States and experience sharing relating to the implementation of  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 102  nuclear power programmes Poland is engaged in an active dialogue with EU States having advanced nuclear power programmes, taking advantage of their experience both in the field of development of nuclear power projects, including those aimed at increasing the share of domestic industry, as well as in the field of radioactive waste and spent fuel management. Talks are also underway concerning the development of new nuclear power technologies. Further cooperation agreements may be concluded with other countries in the field of nuclear power at the level of Ministers responsible for nuclear power. 4. Cooperation with pro-nuclear like-minded states In November 2017, the United Kingdom proposed an initiative to re-activate the pro-nuclear like-minded group. The re-activated group is composed of representatives of Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, France, Finland, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and the United Kingdom. To date, the Group has developed several joint positions on nuclear power matters, addressed to European Union institutions.  - working party meetings of the Group (two meetings/semester at the level of ambassadors at the EU, working party coordination before meetings of the Working Party on Atomic Questions (WPAQ), appointment of the State to coordinate the work of the Group); - joint positions within the EU on the optimisation of conditions for the development of nuclear power; - coordination of positions on important issues within the Working Party on Atomic Questions (WPAQ); - establishment of a coalition for the purpose of voting on an amendment to the regulation implementing Article 41 of the Euratom Treaty; - establishment of a coalition for the purpose of possible voting on amendments to the Euratom Treaty  the sharing of information relevant to nuclear power in the EU.   c) If applicable, financing measures in this area at national level, including EU support and the use of EU funds. Responsible/involved parties*: MAP, MFiPR, MR * subject to potential changes resulting from amendments to the Act on government administration departments. 1. The financing measures for, among other things, energy security in the electricity and gas sectors are described in 3.4.2. 2. Development of the use of LNG infrastructure in Poland This area covers the following projects: - Construction of liquefying (LNG) installations with the use of technologies based on the transmission network capacity. The rapid development of the LNG market in Poland requires that all available options be used to supply both enterprises and vehicle fleets with gas. By exploiting the capacity of high-pressure gas pipelines, energy-efficient gas liquefying installations make it possible to increase the energy efficiency of the transmission system and the scope of services provided. - Construction and operation of LNG bunkering infrastructure in the Baltic Sea-LNG Bunkering Vessel. The objective of the project is to expand infrastructure for bunkering vessels in the Baltic Sea with low-sulphur LNG fuel. The planned development and modernisation of supply systems for vessels, relating to the legal regulations in force and the development of the LNG market, will require the expansion of LNG fuel bunkering infrastructure. Due to an expected increase in demand for LNG bunkering services, it is necessary to enable a quick and reliable      III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 103  bunkering of vessels in the Baltic Sea. - CHP (Combined Heat and Power)  increasing the regasification capacity of the LNG Project objective: Enhancing the energy efficiency of the terminal will allow to reduce its operating costs. - Inter-modal LNG logistic base. Project objective: Increasing the reach of the logistic services Possibility of transporting high volumes of LNG at long distances. Enhancing the effectiveness & Baltic region. Supplying the necessary volumes of LNG to peak shaving stations supporting the National Transmission System (NTS) and satellite regasification. Transmitting raw material for the purpose of providing other LNG services, e.g. supplying vehicle refueling stations, vessel bunkering stations etc. - ISO containers. Project objective: Use of intermodal gas carriers. - Peak shaving regasification station. Project objective: Using LNG to supply the areas of GAZ-SYSTEM infrastructure characterised by insufficient transmission capacity. Ensuring the possibility of providing areas and customers not connected to the NTS with gas infrastructure on a temporary or permanent basis. Creating infrastructural foundations (transshipment depots for ISO containers) for further distribution of natural gas in liquefied form. - LNG transshipment skid. Project objective: Ensuring a possibility of quick and reliable LNG transshipment and bunkering. - Expansion of LNG regasification capacity on the Polish Baltic Sea coast. Project objective: The developing LNG market makes it necessary to prepare gas infrastructure for an increased natural gas off-take in case of market interest. The implementation of projects in the area concerned will contribute to improving energy security (not only in terms of imports, but also in terms of ensuring gas supplies, taking into account infrastructure constraints in Poland) and to a reduction in the emission of air pollutants and greenhouse gases. Proposed form of financing: CEF grant, non-repayable grant. 4. Underground gas storage: From the point of view of increasing domestic gas consumption, subsidies for investments relating to the construction and expansion of underground gas storage facilities should be sought. Expected increase in domestic gas consumption is due to: - investments in gas blocks (including cogeneration blocks); - provision of gas infrastructure to new areas and replacement of existing heat sources with gas; - increase in the importance of gas in road and maritime transport; - increase in the role of gas as an energy source providing back-up for the operation of the sector of unstable renewable energy sources. Additionally, as a location in which a gas transmission and trading hub is planned to be created, Poland should have storage capacities to meet the requirements of the proper operation of the transmission system and the needs of entities from other countries of the region. Support should be provided to investments relating to the construction or expansion of cavern underground gas storage facilities, which are of key importance to safeguarding the security of  III. Policies and measures - Dimension Energy security 104  supplies in winter and in a situation where supplies from prevailing import directions are discontinued. The construction and expansion of cavern underground gas storage facilities are characterised by high capital intensity and time consumption. In a majority of cases, the aforementioned factors and the low profitability of investments make it impossible to rely on market mechanisms when carrying out construction projects. Nevertheless, such projects are necessary in order to ensure the correct operation of the gas system. 5. Support for the development of large-scale energy storage facilities to balance energy demand and generation (power balance) Having regard to current trends in the development of the energy sector and an unavoidable increase in the use of renewable energy sources, there is a need for developing an energy storage technology which will facilitate the integration and development of distributed RES. Support from European funds should cover both the application and purchase of storage technologies, as well as research, development and implementation. At the current level of technological progress and given the current economic situation, there are no incentives to vigorously pursue energy storage projects.   diversification of crude oil supplies and expansion of liquid fuel storage facilities This area covers the following projects (carried out by PERN S.A.): -  - construction of two tanks for crude oil  - construction of tanks for liquid fuels; - construction of the second leg of the Pomeranian Section; - construction of the Boronów-Trzebinia fuel pipeline. These projects contribute to the implementation of the Policy of the Government of the Republic of Poland for Logistic Infrastructure in the Oil Sector. The projects are aimed at supporting the diversification of crude oil supplies through the expansion of the infrastructure system for the supply of crude oil from sources alternative in relation to pipeline supplies from the Russian Federation. The projects will enable an increase in emergency stock storage capacities that will enhance regional energy security. 