101 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    3.4. Dimension Internal energy market  3.4.1. Electricity infrastructure  i. Policies and measures to achieve the targeted level of interconnectivity  ACTION STRATEGY 4.2. PROMOTE THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTERCONNECTIONS DESCRIPTION Reinforce electricity interconnections with Spain and study the creation of alternatives to the current interdependence between the Portuguese and Spanish electricity markets, particularly by assessing the interconnection with other markets, which will make it possible to strengthen supply security and promote greater integration of the electricity market. SECTOR(S) Hydro ACTION MEASURES To promote the development of interconnections, the following action measures are planned:   4.2.1. Reinforce regional cooperation   Pursue close coordination with a view to monitoring interconnection projects, assessing the corresponding funding requirements and supervising progress so as to define a new roadmap for their implementation. It is particularly important to reinforce regional cooperation through the High-Level Group on Interconnections for South-West Europe (both to foster and promote interconnections between Portugal and Spain as well as between Spain and France), and strengthen cooperation through such platforms. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.2.2. Implement the new interconnections that have already been identified  Implement the new electricity interconnection between Portugal (Minho) and Spain (Galicia), which will be achieved by constructing a new 400-kV dual aerial line between Beariz (ES)  Fontefria (ES)  Ponte de Lima (PT)  Vila Nova de Famalicão (PT), including new 400-kV substations at Beariz, Fontefria, in Spain, and Ponte de Lima, in Portugal. This project has been labelled a Project of Common Interest (PCI) by the European Commission. [Expected date: 2020-2021]   4.2.3. Implement new projects to strengthen the network internally  Some network reinforcement projects aim to increase interconnection capacity and reduce possible negative impacts caused by limitations of interruptions in energy supplies. To this end, two projects to strengthen the internal network will be implemented which the European Commission has classified as PCI, namely: (i) Internal line between Pedralva and Sobrado (PCI 2.16.1); (ii) Internal line between Vieira do Minho, Ribeira de Pena and Feira (PCI 2.16.3). These projects seek to increase ly hydro and wind power. They are also related to the new Minho-Galicia interconnection, allowing excess production to be channelled to this network.  The following are equally relevant for implementing the goals for 2030: obtaining economic and environmental benefits from the integration of new RES, reducing production costs and increased competition in the market; reducing CO2, emissions, contributing toward greater sustainability of the European electricity system; obtaining complementarity between different technologies to generate power from renewable sources (namely hydro and wind power); promoting complementarity between the Portuguese and Spanish electricity systems; avoiding the reduction of interconnection capacity and, consequently, lower levels of competitiveness among agents. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.2.4. Promote cooperation and identify new interconnection projects  Considering that interconnection projects to be implemented in the near future (by 2021) will enable Portugal to achieve an interconnection capacity of between 10% and 15%, it is important to contemplate and study new interconnection projects to comply with the 15% goal for interconnection by 2030. This task of identification and implementation will be carried out jointly by the Transmission Network Operators (TSOs) and Distribution Network Operators (DSOs) in Portugal and Spain as well as by the respective competent authorities and regulatory entities. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.2.5. Promote the interconnection of isolated insular electricity systems  102 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    Promote inter-island electricity interconnections as a tool to optimise generation and storage resources and infrastructure, maximise the use of renewable energies and improve the resilience and stability of small isolated electricity systems. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.2.6. Promote market integration  To achieve more integrated markets in the energy sector, it will be important to develop a regulatory framework that promotes such integration by guaranteeing competitiveness among market agents. Defining the regulatory and legal framework will similarly meet the challenges raised by new Community legislation, derived from the clean energy package for all Europeans, particularly instruments associated with designing and configuring the market. [Expected date: 2020-2030] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Decarbonisation; Energy Security; Internal Market MAIN INSTRUMENTS PDIRT-E; PAESC-RAM; PNI SOURCES OF FUNDING EFC Mechanism; EFSI; EIB ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; GRM; GRA; DGEG; ERSE; EEM; ORT   ii. Regional cooperation in this area  With regard to regional cooperation in electricity interconnections, the Lisbon summit of July 2018 led to a commitment by Portugal, Spain and France to:  pursue close coordination with a view to monitoring interconnection projects, assessing the corresponding financing requirements and supervising progress so as to define a new roadmap for their implementation;  build the necessary infrastructures for implementing an efficient and decarbonised internal energy market. This is particularly important with respect to the cross-border interconnections for electricity networks in Member States which have not yet reached a minimum level of integration into the internal energy market, as is the case with Spain and Portugal.  develop Euro-Mediterranean cooperation in energy and work with regional partners in the development of interconnections, more specifically exploring the potential to produce energy from renewable sources and increase energy efficiency, for the mutual benefit of the economies and peoples of the EU and neighbouring States to the south and east of the Mediterranean. Also resulting from the II Energy Interconnection Summit were the following planned measures:  finalise interconnection projects, including the electricity interconnection through the Bay of Biscay, Cantegrit-Navarra and Aragón-Marsillon, (France and Spain) and the interconnection between Portugal and Spain between Vila Fria-Vila do Conde-Recarei (Portugal) and Beariz-Fontefría (Spain);  accelerate work to prepare and identify sources of funding under the European framework to assess and implement new electricity interconnection projects between France and Spain;  identify and introduce additional reinforcements into existing networks so as to fully use electricity interconnection capacity. In November 2018, the Valladolid Declaration was signed by Portugal and Spain in which both Governments actively support the Lisbon Declaration signed on 27 July 2018 and reiterated their objectives to work to achieve interconnections allowing a fully operational internal energy market to be achieved which is safe, competitive and clean.103 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned   With the aim of meeting the challenge to incorporate renewable energies and the development of MIBEL, both governments reaffirmed the importance of the internal and external MIBEL interconnection.  iii. Financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds  See 5.3(iii).  3.4.2.  Energy transmission infrastructure  i. Policies and measures to achieve the key infrastructure objectives, including, if applicable, specific measures to enable the delivery of Projects of Common Interest (PCIs) and other key infrastructure projects The II Energy Interconnection Summit led to a commitment by Portugal, Spain and France to revise the Implementation Plan to execute the current PCIs and to identify, as quickly as possible, new or alternative projects required to overcome the interconnection shortage between the Iberian Peninsula and France, without delaying compliance with interconnection targets.  ii. Regional cooperation in this area With regard to regional cooperation in electricity interconnections, the Lisbon Summit led to a commitment by Portugal, Spain and France to build the necessary infrastructures for implementing an efficient and decarbonised internal energy market. This is particularly important with respect to the cross-border interconnections for gas and electricity networks in Member States which have not yet reached a minimum level of integration into the internal energy market, as is the case with Spain and Portugal. In accordance with the results of this summit, Portugal, Spain and France agreed to define common guidelines to promote the efficient use of networks.  3.4.3. Market integration  i. Policies and measures relating to market integration objectives   At the Valladolid Summit and in the respective Declaration, Portugal and Spain reaffirmed the importance of the MIBEL internal and external interconnection required to meet the challenge to incorporate renewable energies and develop the Iberian Electricity Market (MIBEL). It was also established that work would continue to finalise the Iberian Natural Gas Market (MIBGAS).  ACTION STRATEGY 4.9. PROMOTE INTEGRATION INTO THE INTERNAL EUROPEAN ENERGY MARKET DESCRIPTION In addition to developing the necessary infrastructure to strengthen market integration, creating the necessary technical and operational conditions, it is also important to develop common rules at a regional and European level, as well as to define markets and hubs so that costs associated with providing energy (electricity, natural gas and renewable gases) are uniform and, consequently, enable the respective prices to be harmonised. SECTOR(S) Hydro 104 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    ACTION MEASURES To promote integration into the internal European energy market, the following action measures are planned:   4.9.1 Adapt regulations to promote the reconfiguration and redesign of the market  It will be necessary to adapt national legislation and regulations, based on the evolution of European legislation and regulations, with regard to reconfiguring and redesig and with regard to the theme of this measure, highlighted the publication of the new Regulation on the Internal Electricity Market and Internal Market in Electricity Directive) and the use of network codes associated with the respective sectors (electricity, natural gas and renewable gases). This new regulation envisages changing the role of some market agents as well as defining tariffs and other costs that impact on energy prices. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.9.2. Create conditions to harmonise and link with other European energy markets/hubs  In the particular case of the natural gas and renewable gases sector, in addition to the development and improvement of the functioning of the Iberian Natural Gas Market (MIBGAS),  it is also necessary to develop closer ties between this market and other European hubs, so as to improve its liquidity and make Portugal, and the Iberian Peninsula, an important player in the European energy market. [Expected date: 2020-2030] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Energy Security; Internal Market MAIN INSTRUMENTS n.a. SOURCES OF FUNDING n.s. ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; DGEG; ERSE   ii. Measures to increase the flexibility of the energy system with regard to renewable energy production, including the roll-out of intraday market coupling and cross-border balancing markets  Not applicable.   iii. Measures to ensure the non-discriminatory participation of renewable energy, demand response and storage, including via aggregation, in all energy markets  ACTION STRATEGY 4.3. PROMOTE THE INTRODUCTION OF NEW MANAGEMENT INSTRUMENTS INTO THE NATIONAL ELECTRICITY SYSTEM DESCRIPTION In light of a series of significant -ensuring the security of supplies is shared by the various agents and it is thus important to define each of their roles. In this new model, all agents, including producers, operators, retailers, consumers and political and regulatory institutions, are decisive elements in the process of guaranteeing supplies. These changes in the market context make it necessary to redesign the electricity market and some of its instruments. SECTOR(S) Energy; Industry ACTION MEASURES To promote the introduction of new management instruments into the national electricity system, the following action measures are planned:   4.3.1. Regulate the figure of the Market Aggregator  This new figure will act within the scope of the NES and aims to resolve supply shortcomings in the aggregation service market. The market aggregator will be obliged to acquire energy produced by power plants that wish to sell it the said energy under a special system covered by the general remuneration scheme, and will also be required to place such energy on the market. 105 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    This figure can also acquire energy produced by power plants under a special scheme, covered by the guaranteed remuneration scheme, as well as energy produced by units covered by small-scale distributed production. [Expected date: 2020-2021]   4.3.2. Revise the regulatory and market framework in relation to system services  At a European level, the entire process associated with system services is undergoing profound changes with a view to harmonising the current national markets into markets operating on single European platforms, for each of the different types of reserves, using a model of direct negotiations. Existing incentives to guarantee output that contribute toward maintaining the availability of the electricity production capacity (Ministerial Implementing Order No 41/2017 of 27 January 2017) and invest in new production capacity (investment incentives  Ministerial Implementing Order No 251/2012 of 20 August 2012), with sufficient levels to ensure the security of supplies and interruptibility services (Ministerial Implementing Order No 592/2010 of 29 July 2010), complementary system services aimed only at consumption, will also be revised pursuant to the publication of the new European Parliament and Council Directive on common rules for the internal electricity market and new European Parliament and Council regulations on the internal electricity market. [Expected date: 2019-2021]   4.3.3. Study and promote the introduction of the figure of the Demand Aggregator  This new figure will operate within NES and aims to resolve shortcomings in market supply using aggregation services. The aim of the demand aggregator is to group together different agents/entities, such as end users, small producers, storage, charging points for electric vehicles or any combination of these elements, acting as a single entity and participating in the electricity market and supplying system services. This mechanism promotes system flexibility, improves system management in terms of supply security and promotes greater participation of agents in the market. [Expected date: 2020-2025]   4.3.4. Promote the adaptation of the new European regulatory framework  T the new Regulation on the Internal Electricity Market, setting out all the new requirements for new producers that may be directly or indirectly responsible for programming, with production forecasts for generation facilities. This situation needs to be implemented into the Portuguese electricity system. [Expected date: 2020-2025] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Energy Security; Internal Market MAIN INSTRUMENTS n.a. SOURCES OF FUNDING n.s. ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; GRA; DGEG; ERSE   The operating model for the European Intraday Market, based on continuous intraday trading, will allow energy trading between agents located in the different countries/price zones with implicit capacity allocation. To achieve this objective, several market operators and European system operators are implementing the Cross-Border Intraday Market Project (XBID), which provides the basic contract infrastructure for the systems and procedures on which the pan-European continuous intraday market will be implemented. This market will permit electrical power to be traded up to 60 minutes before delivery, thus allowing renewable energies to be integrated. Portugal has been part of this new mechanism since it entered into operation (2018). With the publication of Regulation (EU) 2017/2195 of 23 November 2017 establishing a guideline on electricity balancing, system services markets managed by European system operators 106 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned   need to be coordinated. To ensure the implementation of the abovementioned regulation, European system operators are currently cooperating.  Imbalance Netting  a process for the real-time mutual exchange of imbalances of interconnected European electricity systems. It is expected that Portugal will join this process in 2019;  Replacement Reserves  Based on the TSO-TSO model, the main aim is to establish and operate a centralised platform capable of compiling all Replacement Reserve (RR) offers from the different national markets operated by each TSO and conduct an optimised allocation of interconnection offers and capacity to satisfy, up to 30 minutes before real time, any differences between scheduled operations in daily and intraday markets and generation and consumption forecasts. This mechanism is expected to start operation at the end of 2019 and Portugal will participate immediately;  Manual frequency restoration reserves  Based on the TSO-TSO model, the main aim is to establish and operate a centralised platform capable of compiling all manual Frequency Replacement Reserve (mFRR), offers from the different national markets operated by each TSO and conduct optimised allocation to satisfy needs, both before and in real time It is expected that Portugal will comply with the deadlines set out in Regulation (EU) 2017/2195 of 23 November 2017, i.e. Portugal will be integrated into this new mechanism in 2021;  Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserves  Based on the TSO-TSO model, the main aim is to establish and operate a centralised platform capable of mobilising in a coordinated an economically efficient manner, energy balancing offers relating to Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserves (aFRR) from the different national markets operated by each TSO and conduct optimised allocation of interconnection capacity to satisfy the needs of each TSO in real time It is expected that Portugal will comply with the deadlines set out in Regulation (EU) 2017/2195 of 23 November 2017, i.e. Portugal will be integrated into this new mechanism in 2021; The expected benefits of the abovementioned processes are:  An increase in efficiency and competition in system services markets in the different systems;  Greater coordination of the different system services markets and improved possibility for exchanging systems services, thus optimising the operating security of the systems involved;  Facilitate electricity integration from renewable energy sources.  iv. Policies and measures to protect consumers, especially vulnerable consumers and to improve the competitiveness and contestability of the retail energy market  See point 3.4.  v. Description of measures to enable and develop demand response including those addressing tariffs to support dynamic pricing  As already mentioned, in February 2018, ERSE approved the rules for implementing, as of 1 June 2018, two pilot-projects, including the introduction of dynamic tariffs for access network access in mainland Portugal. Participation in the pilot-projects, intended only for industrial consumers, is voluntary and will cover 100 consumers per pilot-project, over 12 months. Based on the results of the pilot-projects, ERSE will conduct a cost-benefit analysis to assess the merits for the electricity system and the possible setting of specific targets for installing smart meters.  3.4.4. Energy poverty  It is essential to ensure that the process of decarbonisation and energy transition take place in a fair, cohesive and inclusive manner and thus the steps taken over the next decade must not accentuate energy poverty, rather, solutions must be found to mitigate this problem. Situations of energy poverty must be identified and obviated through diverse measures, including urban rehabilitation and promoting energy efficiency and renewable sources of energy. 107 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned   It is also necessary to examine the economic and social aspects of this transition, including the possibility of creating new clusters and assessing the most affected sectors and developing policies to create conditions for their development and anticipate suitable territorial or social responses with regard to education, training and professional redeployment, to guarantee fair transition.  ACTION STRATEGY 8.1. ENSURE FAIR TRANSITION DESCRIPTION Anticipate potential positive and negative impacts, at a social, economic and environmental level, associated with decarbonisation and energy transition in the medium and long-term, promoting the creation of new jobs and clusters and planning specific measures to ensure fair transition for companies, workers and communities in general, by focusing on new business models, education, professional training and upskilling. SECTOR(S) Transversal ACTION MEASURES To ensure fair transition, the following action measures are planned:  8.1.1. Prepare a Fair Transition Strategy  Develop a Fair Transition Strategy that aims to identify and highlight the opportunities and risks associated with decarbonisation and energy transition on the path to carbon neutrality by 2050, as well as identify possible sources of funding that ensure fair transition in economic, social and environmental aspects.  This Strategy will be prepared in conjunction with relevant entities, including representatives of central and local government, representatives from the energy, environment, industry, economy, jobs and academic sectors. It will be framed in keeping with developments at a Community and international level in relation to fair transition. This Strategy will also be transversal, encompassing all sectors of activity, and will consider the interests of companies, workers and the communities where they are located as well as the interests of society in general that need to be safeguarded in the context of a transition that is necessary but aims to be fair and integrating, while also promoting national competitiveness.  This Strategy will thus be the basis for developing specific Action Plans, such as the Action Plan to end the generation of electricity from coal as set out in Target 1  DECARBONISE THE NATIONAL ECONOMY [Expected date: 2020-2030] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Decarbonisation 108 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    MAIN INSTRUMENTS RNC2050 SOURCES OF FUNDING EF ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; METD; MTSS; MCT; GRA; GRM  ACTION STRATEGY 8.2. FIGHT ENERGY POVERTY AND IMPROVE INSTRUMENTS TO PROTECT VULNERABLE CUSTOMERS DESCRIPTION Energy poverty has an impact not just on the well-being and comfort of citizens but also on health, mortality, school performance, the professional income of adults and social isolation of families and young people. It is thus important to design and develop inclusive strategies to fight energy poverty and increase the efficient consumption of energy among the population living in underprivileged socio-economic conditions and info-exclusion, by promoting various kinds of actions, including grassroot actions among affected citizens. To effectively fight energy poverty, it is necessary to have in-depth information on the national situation to be able to direct measures more effectively. This is the case with the rehabilitation of buildings, promoting renewable energy and communications and education campaigns. With the consumer as an informed and active agent in the market, and with instruments to protect more vulnerable consumers, a further strategic priority for 2030 will be addressed, that of fighting energy poverty and consumer vulnerability. SECTOR(S) Domestic ACTION MEASURES To fight energy poverty and improve instruments to protect vulnerable customers, the following action measures are planned:   8.2.1. Promote a long-term strategy to fight energy poverty  Approve a long-term Strategy to fight energy poverty, which improves knowledge of this problem, seeking to provide better solutions and implement structural changes to mitigate it.  This strategy will be prepared in conjunction with relevant entities, including entities from central and local government, consumer associations, representatives of the energy sector and academia. Its objective is to diagnose and characterise the problem, develop monitoring indicators, monitoring strategies, establish targets to reduce energy poverty in the medium and long-term, on a national, regional and local level, and propose specific measures to achieve these targets, as well as forms of funding.  The implementation of this strategy will be monitored by a multidisciplinary work group created for the purpose. [Expected date: 2019-2021]  8.2.2. Establish a national system to assess and monitor energy poverty, including the number of families facing energy poverty  It is essential to identify the factors that lead to situations of energy poverty to understand the causes that structurally or contextually influence or cause energy poverty. In addition to recognising these factors, there is a need to implement clear methods to measure energy poverty, as this will provide a basic tool to implement a concerted and successful strategy to protect vulnerable consumers.  To effectively monitor the progress of actions to fight energy poverty and, particularly, the situation of citizens facing this challenge it is important to know the number of families living in energy poverty as well as their main characteristics (composition, income level, etc.) and their geographic concentration to establish an effective and robust national system to assess and monitor energy poverty. [Expected date: 2020- 2021] 8.2.3. Implement mechanisms to protect vulnerable consumers and study the introduction of new mechanisms  109 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    Implement mechanisms that make it possible to reduce the energy costs of domestic consumers, helping ensure that the price of energy is not a factor for exclusion in access to these services, irrespective of the economic, social or geographic situation of consumers. This will simultaneously ensure universal access to quality services at accessible prices. Among these mechanisms, the Energy Social Tariff has had a substantial impact on promoting economic accessibility.  It is also necessary to implement measures to protect vulnerable consumers or consumers with serious health problems, making it impossible for energy retailers to disconnect households if bills are paid late. This is important to protect vulnerable clients in Portugal considering current levels of energy poverty and the occurrence of increasingly extreme climate phenomena.  Forms of support that enable vulnerable consumers to participate in energy communities and collective self-generation will also be promoted. [Expected date: 2019-2030]  8.2.4. Develop programmes to promote and support energy efficiency and integrate renewable energy to mitigate energy poverty Promote more structural support programmes, actions and mechanisms to fight situations of energy poverty, such as incentives to change consumption patterns, actions aimed at promoting investments in energy efficiency, rehabilitation of buildings and programmes that aim to integrate renewable energies. These support mechanisms will be developed in conjunction with municipalities to be better suited to the local situation and promote closer interaction with consumers facing energy poverty. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   8.2.5. Promote and support local strategies to fight energy poverty  Local energy strategies aimed at fighting energy poverty will be supported and encouraged following a logic of proximity and greater reach for policies to mitigate this problem. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   8.2.6. Disseminate information to mitigate energy poverty  The field of complementary measures includes structural measures oriented toward promoting awareness and access to relevant information to support decision-making. The dissemination of relevant information will make it possible to increase the knowledge of consumers in relation to their rights/duties and provide all available information on energy tariffs and social support available in the market. In this regard, the availability of information and tools to compare prices among different operators and campaigns to disseminate relevant information on the energy market are especially important. Despite being an indirect form of intervention, providing consumers with comprehensive knowledge of energy markets and all the support tools available plays a fundamental role in changing consumption patterns and can be a measure to minimise energy poverty. [Expected date: 2020-2030] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Decarbonisation; Energy efficiency MAIN INSTRUMENTS n.a. SOURCES OF FUNDING EEF; FAI; EF ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; METD; MTSS; GRA; DGEG; RNAE; Energy Agencies