95 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned   See 5.3(iii).  3.3. Dimension Energy security  Supply security must be ensured by implementing suitable measures to balance supply and demand, namely, measures for the overall technical management of the system, which encourage the diversification of sources of supply and contribute toward the planning, construction and maintenance of necessary infrastructure. Increased interconnection capacity, storage systems (fundamental in an energy system that is essentially based on renewable sources), the implementation of new network planning mechanisms and the dissemination of smart networks, among other measures, will all contribute greatly to this end. i. Policies and measures relating to energy security  ACTION STRATEGY 4.1. PROMOTE STORAGE SYSTEMS DESCRIPTION The existence of storage systems in different forms is considered to be fundamental to better manage the national energy system in its various sub-sectors, playing a crucial role and promoting the flexibility and stability of the national electricity system. It is thus important to continue to focus on reversible pumping systems in hydroelectric plants and try to develop other technological solutions that include using battery technology and technologies associated with hydrogen. A significant part of the new storage capacity will be directly associated with centres generating electricity from renewable sources. SECTOR(S) Hydro ACTION MEASURES To promote storage systems, the following action measures are planned:   4.1.1. Create the legal framework to implement storage systems  Create a legal framework that makes it possible to promote the implementation of different forms of storage systems, particularly for the electricity sector. [Expected date: 2020-2021]   4.1.2. Create a Roadmap for storage in Portugal  The main objective of this Roadmap is to provide a practical, independent and objective analysis of the various possible trajectories to implement storage systems, aligned with the objectives of renewable sources of energy and decarbonisation, considering the security of supplies, the quality of service and the economic sustainability of the options to be adopted. This document will be updated at least every five years to reflect the evolution in technology and costs. [Expected date: 2020-2025]   4.1.3. Promote the implementation of storage projects associated with centres generating electricity from renewable sources  Support the development of pilot projects that promote the implementation of technologies that are not widespread or have not yet matured, with a view to improving their technical and economic viability, focusing on the association between renewable production and storage. [Expected date: 2020-2025]   4.1.4. Promote storage in the islands  Increase electricity storage capacity in island territories with isolated electricity networks, using reversible hydro systems, batteries, hydrogen and other technologies. Implement smart electricity grids to strengthen the stability and resilience of small-scale isolated electricity systems and increase the penetration of intermittent renewable sources of energy. [Expected date: 2020-2030] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Decarbonisation; Energy Security; Internal Market; R&I&C MAIN INSTRUMENTS RNC2050; PAESC-RAM; PAESI-Madeira; PAESI-Porto Santo 96 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    SOURCES OF FUNDING ERDF; FAI; Community Funds (PO SEUR, Regional OPs); Horizon Europe; Innovation Fund ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; GRM; GRA; DGEG; ERSE; EEM; Regional Agency for Energy and the Environment of the Autonomous Region of Madeira (AREAM)   ACTION STRATEGY 4.4. PROMOTE THE DIGITALISATION OF THE ENERGY SYSTEM DESCRIPTION Promoting energy transition in the energy sector will therefore entail a new model for transmission and distribution networks, based on the pursuit of synergies among the various options, including the rapid and gradual expansion and modernisation of infrastructure, reconfiguration and digitalisation of the market. SECTOR(S) Energy; Residential; Services; Industry ACTION MEASURES To promote the digitalisation of the energy system, the following action measures are planned:  4.4.1 Promote the expansion of smart meters  In an increasingly modern and digitalised energy system, smart meters play a fundamental role in the way information is obtained and used to benefit consumers, providing this information to them, which will enable more dynamic and effective management of the system, favouring energy efficiency, improved supply for consumers and greater efficiency in network operations. To quickly and effectively achieve increasingly higher levels of smart meters in the system, there will be a drive to install smart meters, from an economically viable perspective, promoting the roll-out for all consumers, ensuring better information and the involvement of consumers in the coming years. Access to more accurate information through smart meters will also have a positive impact, for example, on the transparency and reliability of the information as well as of all the agents involved. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.4.2. Promote the development of smart grids  The planning for transmission and distribution networks and the respective investments will have an innovative component of high-performance levels based on smart systems. It is thus essential to encourage innovation, pursuant to directives defined for this purpose, which must consider the need to maintain the resilience of systems and networks, mitigating and preventing any impact on security.  The necessary rules and orientations will be defined to this end, in the form of legislation and regulations, to implement the development of smart grids. Access to more accurate information through smart grids will also have a positive impact, for example, on the transparency and reliability of the information as well as of all the agents involved. It is also important to safeguard the information and security of the grids against cybersecurity related phenomena and events. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.4.3. Promote the development of a long-term plan to digitalise the energy sector  The energy sector will perforce undergo significant changes over coming years, partly due to the growing digitalisation of the sector. These changes are complex and challenging, both for companies/operators as well as for consumers, and must be studied and anticipated to prepare the system and consumers for the imminent changes in the sector. This new reality could also entail legislative changes to provide a suitable legal framework to enable, for example, the availability of detailed data on consumption and the definition of the respective time frames to create new solutions. [Expected date: 2020-2025] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Decarbonisation; Energy Efficiency; Energy Security; Internal Market; R&I&C MAIN INSTRUMENTS PNI SOURCES OF FUNDING EFC Mechanism ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; METD; GRA; DGEG; ERSE 97 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    ACTION STRATEGY 4.5. PROMOTE SUITABLE PLANNING FOR THE NATIONAL ENERGY SYSTEM ON A PATH TO ENERGY TRANSITION DESCRIPTION Increase installed capacity to produce electricity from renewable sources of energy, including distributed production and self-generation. It is also necessary to promote other sources of renewable energy that are currently not widespread in the various sectors. This requires a response at the level of network infrastructure that not only accommodates this increase in capacity and diversification of sources but also all the challenges that the new paradigm of the energy supply and demand represents for the national electricity system. The National Natural Gas System also faces a similar challenge as renewable gases will increasingly be incorporated into the system. The coherence of national electricity planning alongside planning on an EU scale are equally important. SECTOR(S) Hydro ACTION MEASURES To promote suitable planning for the National Energy System, the following action measures are envisaged:   4.5.1. Create a strategic vision for the national electricity network for 2030 and 2050  This action will consist of a technical study for a strategic and architectural vision and roadmap for the national electricity network for the targets set out in NECP. Its main objectives include: (i) presenting a strategic vision for networks; (ii) reflecting on market models for energy transactions and system services; (iii) assessing the long-term security of supplies. [Expected date: 2019  2020]   4.5.2. Plan and promote the integrated and joint management of the network, with a regional and trans-border approach  To optimise resources it is extremely important for network management to use a trans-border approach. To this end, dialogue between national and regional network operators must be promoted and supported. At the same time, the interdependence of the electricity system and gas system must also be considered at a national and trans-n keeping with the Community approach and policy. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.5.3. Promote ongoing improvements for network planning instruments  The current network planning instruments, in the form of Network Development and Investment Plans (PDIR), must consider the goals and targets set out in NECP and RCN 2050, as well as the need to adapt network investments to prepare the networks for the challenges of energy transition (greater integration of renewables, decentralised production, storage, electric vehicles, flexibility, among others).  While preparing the Network Development and Investment Plans (PDIR), directives will be defined and promoted to continuously improve networks, so that documents can be produced in a more transparent, clear and accurate manner while presenting information, thus facilitating their analysis and the respective implementation of the investments.  The same logic will be applied to the planning for natural gas networks, simultaneously considering the interdependence of ing with the Community approach and policy.  It is also crucial to promote dialogue and cooperation among public entities, operators and other involved agents to improve the planning and management/operation of networks. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.5.4. Create network planning mechanisms at a local level  The challenge of having adequate network infrastructure to enable effective energy transition is especially critical for the Low Voltage Network (LV) that will cease to be a passive network and will now integrate a set of new concepts, from network intelligence, systems to support management, smart meters, storage, energy management, local production, energy communities, electric vehicles, among others, which are all variables that must be considered while creating the network of the future. 98 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    Mechanisms will be created to ensure this transformation, which will enable interlocutors to use the necessary tools to plan LV networks in an efficient and cost-effective manner, ensuring the quality of the service and the security of supplies. [Expected date: 2020-2025] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Energy Security; Internal Market MAIN INSTRUMENTS RNC2050; PDIRT-E; PDIRGN; PDIRD-E; PDIRD-GN; RMSA-E; RMSA-GN SOURCES OF FUNDING n.s. ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; GRA; ERSE; DGEG; Network Operators; GRM  ACTION STRATEGY 4.6. CARRY OUT THE NECESSARY RISK ASSESSMENTS, PREVENTIVE ACTION PLANS AND EMERGENCY PLANS FOR THE ENERGY SECTOR DESCRIPTION Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2017 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply sets out the need to prepare Preventive Action Plans and Emergency Plans. The implementation of this regulation also entails assessing risk, the security of supplies and prevention measures and measures for regional emergency situations. These assessments involve surveying risks, defining the probability and impact of certain events that result in greater restrictions and disruptions to national gas systems. The plans to be defined in this regard, based on the information of the risk assessments, define preventive measures with a view to reducing or eliminating the impact of the said events as well as actions in emergency/crisis situations if a given event identified in the risk assessments was to occur.  More recently, aParliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector was published, which provides an overview of procedures defined for the gas sector (included in Regulation (EU) 2017/1938 of 25 October 2017). SECTOR(S) Hydro ACTION MEASURES The following action measures are planned to carry out the necessary risk assessments, preventive action plans and emergency plans for the energy sector:   4.6.1. Promote and foment regional cooperation for risk and emergency matters   In the natural gas sector, in order to define national and common (regional) risk assessments and preventive action plans and national emergency plans (which also have a regional component) there is a need for increasingly greater and more effective/efficient cooperation among competent national authorities and the respective transmission operators, who are also represented in European forums discussing issues concerning the security of supplies, as is the case of the Gas Coordination Group (organised and coordinated by the European Commission).  In the electricity sector, after the regulation to prepare for risks in the electricity sector was defined, an identical approach to that of the natural gas sector was contemplated. As such, cooperation is viewed similarly, giving equal importance to interaction with counterpart authorities and entities in forums for discussion and cooperation, as is the case of the Electricity Coordination Group (organised and coordinated by the European Commission). [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.6.2. Promote better coordination among operators and other agents in the sector  To respond to the provisions set out in regulations in force and under preparation in relation to the security of supplies, particularly identifying and assessing risks and preparing plans for prevention and intervention in case of emergency, it is necessary to compile information providing a rigorous description of the respective systems (natural gas and electricity).  Apart from collecting information from operators and other entities and agents operating in the respective systems, it is necessary for them to cooperate closely with each other and with the competent authorities, to obtain assessments and ensure planning that is closer to reality, resulting in greater efficacy and efficiency. [Expected date: 2020-2030] 99 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Energy Security; Internal Market MAIN INSTRUMENTS PPA SNGN; PE SNGN; PPR SEN SOURCES OF FUNDING n.s. ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; DGEG  ACTION STRATEGY 4.7. ADJUST THE ROLE OF NATURAL GAS IN THE ENERGY MIX, FOCUSING ON DECARBONISING THE SECTOR DESCRIPTION The path to energy transition over the next decade, 2021-2030, involves a combination of energy technologies and vectors, where natural gas will play an important role. From the perspective of gradually reducing the consumption of fossil fuels, natural gas, which is the fossil fuel with the lowest GHG emissions, will remain as an energy source in the next decade, particularly in electricity generation and industrial consumption. The growing integration of renewable gases and the consequent decarbonisation of the gas sector is a priority. This trajectory, by which the role of natural gas in the energy mix will be adjusted, is directly linked to the evolution of the electrification of consumption and the introduction of renewable gases, particularly hydrogen. SECTOR(S) Hydro ACTION MEASURES The following action measures are planned to adjust the role of natural gas in the energy mix:   4.7.1 Approach natural gas as an element for flexibility in the electricity generation system  Maintaining the natural gas capacity in the electricity-generation system until at least 2040 will ensure the necessary backup to implement the transition to an electricity system that is widely based on renewable sources, allowing time for the development of technological solutions, with special emphasis on storage, which will give the system the necessary resilience to guarantee adequate levels of supplies. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.7.2. Suitable network planning for energy transition  The current network planning instruments, in the form of the Network Development and Investment Plans (PDIR), will consider the goals and targets set out in NECP as well as the need to adapt network investments to prepare them for the challenges of energy transition (increased electrification, greater integration of renewables, particularly renewable gases, among others). [Expected date: 2020-2030] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Energy Security; Internal Market MAIN INSTRUMENTS RNC2050; PDIRGN; PDIRD-GN; RMSA; PAESC-RAM SOURCES OF FUNDING n.s. ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; GRM; DGEG; ERSE  ACTION STRATEGY 4.8. PROMOTE THE DIVERSIFICATION OF SOURCES AND SUPPLY ROUTES FOR ENERGY RESOURCES DESCRIPTION With regard to supply security, it is crucial to diversify sources and routes to supply energy resources, without, however, undermining decarbonisation targets. Even though Portugal has reasonable diversification, there is still considerable concentration, with preferred routes for energy supplies. It is thus important to improve the diversification and/or reduce the concentration of the origin of energy resources. 100 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 3. Policies and measures planned    SECTOR(S) Energy ACTION MEASURES To promote the diversification of sources and supply routes for energy resources, the following action measures are planned:   4.8.1 Promote and reinforce external cooperation in the field of energy  To enable better diversification of sources and routes for energy resources external cooperation with third countries will be strengthened, namely, by means of existing platforms for cooperation or the creation of new platforms, promoting and encouraging the participation of companies operating in the energy sector, to promote closer commercial ties and the possibility of opening up new markets. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.8.2. Pro  n market is recognised, especially Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) through the Sines LNG Terminal (one of the main deep water ports in Europe, which enables greater diversity in receiving gas tankers). Thus, it is equally important to maintain the national plan to promote interconnections in this sector and, to this end, to reinforce cooperation with Spain, France and the European Commission, namely, through high-level groups on interconnections, particularly the High-Level Group for interconnections in Southwest Europe, created within the scope of the Madrid Declaration. [Expected date: 2020-2030]   4.8.3. Create a sustainable market for maritime LNG, enabling the use of LNG in ships  It is important to consider the possibility of creating a sustainable market for maritime LNG, with Portugal emerging as a transhipment hub for small-scale LNG and as a service area for LNG ships. Increasing the environmental sustainability of a port can include promoting LNG in the port system.  The Strategy to Increase the Competitiveness of the Mainland Commercial Ports Network envisages a series of investments in infrastructure, including supplying LNG to ships. It is important to note that on 1 January 2020, the new international regulations (IMO  International Maritime Organization 2020) enter into force, which benchmark the type of fuels that can be used for maritime transport and require a significant reduction in the sulphur content of the fuel oil used by ships. In this regard, LNG is a potential alternative fuel. [Expected date: 2020-2030] CONTRIBUTION TO THE 5 DIMENSIONS Energy security MAIN INSTRUMENTS PNI SOURCES OF FUNDING EFC Mechanism; EFSI ENTITY RESPONSIBLE MAAC; MM; GRA; DGEG   ii. Regional cooperation in this area  The previous subparagraph sets out action measures to reinforce regional cooperation with respect to interconnections, at the level of new instruments to manage the national electricity system and at the level of the planning and integrated and joint management of the network, with a regional and trans-border logic.  iii. Financing measures in this area at national level, including Union support and the use of Union funds  See 5.3(iii).