51 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 2. objectives and targets   2.5. Dimension Research, innovation and competitiveness i. National objectives and funding targets for public and private research and innovation in the public and private sectors  Portugal is committed to developing actions that ensure it is a leader in terms of the penetration of renewable energy sources and new low-carbon technological solutions to promote decarbonisation of the economy and achieve the goals set out for 2030 within the scope of this Plan.    Promoting research, innovation and competitiveness (R&I&C) to support the implementation of NECP is essential for the success of the plan, which also considers the various national competences as well as its role with respect to cooperation and activities underway on a Union level. The Portuguese government recently committed to an overall investment of 3% of GDP by 2030 in research and development (R&D). The targets proposed by Portugal for 2030 with regard to energy and climate for carbon neutrality by 2050 require continued growth in investment in low-carbon technologies. It is thus clear that investments in R&D in the areas of energy and climate will grow in the national panorama until 2030.  Table 17- National funding targets for research and innovation in the public and private sectors (% of GDP)  2020 2030 Total R&D investment in Portugal 1.8% 3.0% R&D investment in energy - 0.2% R&D investment in water and the climate - 0.2%   The European strategy for Research, Development and Innovation for the energy sector, including the  European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan), Horizon Europe (current programme proposal that will succeed Horizon 2020) and the Investment Plan for Europe (Juncker Plan), integrate R&D targets for the energy sector for the 2020-benefits in terms of combining efforts to achieve common objectives for the penetration of new technologies and responding to joint challenges with respect to disruptive actions.  Portugal has participated in several implementation groups and activities and considers collaboration in specialist groups for carrying out coordinated action and other forms of collaboration to develop guided projects to be important. The aim is to comply with ambitious targets for the 2030 horizon. Based on the objectives and targets set out for the remaining aspects in NECP, national programmes are planned to promote RD&I, which initially, will include as a minimum, the following topics:  (i) Energy management smart systems and new infrastructures; (ii) Energy Storage; (iii) Low-carbon technologies; (iv) Energy Efficiency; (v) Hydrogen as an energy source. It is also important to provide programmes for competitiveness in the area of energy with a view to increasing the quality and competitiveness of national RD&I and accelerating the implementation of research results and the replication of such results. Competitiveness programmes will also include, as a minimum, the following topics: (i) Support for participation in high-quality international research and development; (ii) Support for establishing technological pilots; (iii) Support for training, capacity-building and mobility; (iv) Support for creating industrial clusters in new areas of technological development; (v) Support for promoting business models based on low-carbon products and services; (vi) Support for implementing results. Portugal is also developing a set of 15 Thematic Agendas for Research and Innovation, coordinated by the Foundation for Science and Technology (Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, I.P.  - FCT), which specifically aim to mobilise experts from R&D institutions and companies to identify challenges and opportunities in the national scientific and technological system. 52 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 2. objectives and targets   These agendas are also expected to contribute toward developing research and innovation and respond to the problems and needs of different sectors of society. Agendas will be developed for different areas that have a significant impact on energy transition and climate action, more specifically, the Agri-food sector, Forests and Biodiversity, Climate Change, Urban Science and Cities for the Future, Circular Economy, Industry and Manufacturing, Oceans, Sustainable Energy Systems, among others. The inclusive and dynamic process of developing the agendas, involving experts drawn from academia, research centres, companies, public entities and citizens, to create a dialogue among different national actors, made it possible to identify promising and emerging areas for Portuguese research and innovation, with a medium and long-term perspective, for the 2030 horizon.  ii. National objectives, including long-term targets, for the deployment of low carbon technologies  Not applicable.  iii. National objectives with regard to competitiveness  Not applicable. 