44 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 2. objectives and targets   2.3. Dimension Energy security i. national objectives for the diversification of energy sources and supply from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy system  Diversification of energy sources must be fostered from a perspective of supply security and is a national objective. As Portugal does not have natural gas or oil, it focuses on the development of endogenous renewable energy resources, and incentives have been provided in this regard. The results of this policy are reflected in the gradual reduction in energy dependency which has been seen over the last 10-15 years. Although specific objectives have not been defined for supply by third countries, with regard to the gas and oil sectors, Portugal has a diversified portfolio of suppliers and origins of these products (Chapter 4), which is to be consolidated, given that the most recent studies/assessments show a good level of supply security brought about by such diversification. The increase in recent years of underground storage capacity at Carriço and the tanks at the Sines LNG Terminal have also contributed to the diversification of sources supplying natural gas to Portugal. In the case of electrical power, the diversification of external origins is more limited for geographical reasons, and as such, the focus is mainly on the diversification of internal production (focus on renewable production, exploiting the potential that exists in Portugal). However, equally high importance is also given to external origins with emphasis on reinforcing interconnections with Spain, which will allow improved balancing in the NES and consequently, better supply security. Finally, it is important to note that the diversification of sources and energy resource supply routes is crucial for the safety of supplies, without, however, undermining decarbonisation targets.   ii. National objectives with regard to reducing energy import dependency from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems  Energy security is achieved by guaranteeing the security of supplies, which must also consider decarbonisation targets, based on specific characteristics of energy systems while simultaneously increasing their resilience. A parallel objective is to improve the diversification of energy sources, the complementary use of renewable resources and guaranteed supplies by third countries, without, however, undermining decarbonisation targets. This also entails focusing on developing energy storage solutions, which will hdependence on external sources in the medium and long-term. To this end, Portugal will continue to reduce its energy dependence on external sources, pursuing its current tives for 2030 include renewed emphasis on using endogenous renewable energy resources as well as on energy efficiency. 45 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 2. objectives and targets   Table 15-   2030 Energy dependency 65%   iii. National objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular by means of deploying domestic energy sources, demand response and energy storage  National objectives for implanting domestic energy sources: Portugal will continue to focus on developing a highly decarbonised electricity-generation sector, considering the availability of endogenous renewable resources, such as water, wind, solar, biomass and geothermal energy. It has developed a safe and reliable electricity system that is capable of dealing with the variability that increased focus on renewables introduced, which will undergo important evolution over the next decade.  There will be a renewed drive to explore the potential of renewable energies in the 2030 time frame, with special emphasis on solar and onshore/offshore wind technologies. Distributed generation and pilot projects will also be promoted (concentrated photovoltaic, stimulated geothermal and wave energies).  National objectives to increase storage The existence of storage systems in different forms is considered to be fundamental and crucial to ensure better management of the national energy system in its various sub-sectors, as a tool promoting the flexibility and stability of the national electricity system. It is thus important to continue to focus on reversible pumping systems in hydroelectric plants and to try and develop other technological solutions, which include using battery and hydrogen technologies. A significant share of the new storage capacity will be directly associated with renewable electricity generation centres. In the case of electrical power, storage is seen as a tool for the flexibility and stability of the NES.  Storage capacity is expected to increase by 2030, fundamentally by means of reversible hydroelectric pumping facilities and, later in the decade, through a contribution by battery and hydrogen technologies. A significant part of this capacity is associated with generation facilities via wind and solar technologies while the remainder is dedicated storage. With regard to objectives for energy storage in the natural gas and oil and oil derivatives sectors, national rules exist arising from Community legislation to create security reserves with a view to being able to respond to crisis situations or in the event of supply emergency/disruption in such products. Current underground capacity at Carriço allows all natural gas security reserves for the coming years to be stored. National objectives to increase demand response With regard to demand response in the electricity sector, also considered in the evolution of demand are energy savings resulting from existing and planned efficiency measures and consumption requirements, taking into account forecasts for increased electrical vehicle use. Industrial faciliti-the- storage in the building sector and industrial sector, so as to make daily variations in the public service electricity network load  for charging electric vehicles will also become more generalised. 46 NECP 2030 Section A - National Plan - Chapter 2. objectives and targets   Using the Annual Supply Security Monitoring Reports for the electricity and natural gas sectors as a basis for the electricity and natural gas sectors (RMSAs), the aim is to achieve a balance between existing and expected supply and demand for the 2030-2040 horizon. Taken into consideration in expected supply are new installation licensing processes and guidelines on energy policy (new installations and decommissioning of existing installations