2.3. Dimension: energy security  i. The elements set out in Article 4(c) At present, the obligations and responsibilities for safeguarding the security of the electricity supply in the Slovak Republic are set out in Act No 251/2012 (Act on Energy and on the amendment and supplement of some other acts). Electricity supply The main state authority for supply security policy is the Slovak Ministry of Economy. In accordance with Section 88 of the Energy Act, the Ministry of Economy ensures the monitoring of the security of the electricity supply; it determines the application of measures to ensure the security of the electricity supply if the safety and reliability of the electricity system is compromised. Current legislation relating to the security of the electricity supply is based on the transposition of the Third Energy Package for an EU internal market, which consists of Directive 2009/72/EC (Article 4) and Directive 2005/89/EC (Article 7). At present, this EU legislation is being replaced by new legislation that was part of the Clean energy for all Europeans package and will therefore need to be significantly updated in the short term. National procedures for the prevention and management of emergencies are included in the Energy Act of 2012 (Act No 251/2012, on energy) and in Decree of the Slovak Ministry of Economy No 416/2012, laying down details on the procedure during a state of emergency in the electricity and gas sectors, and Decree of the Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic No 80/2019, which from 1 April 2019 amends and supplements Decree No 416/2012, reflecting, inter alia, the requirements of Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2196 of 24 November 2017, establishing a network code on electricity emergency and restoration. The ENTSO-E Operational Handbook (Operational Handbook RG CE, in particular Policy 5  Emergency Operations) determines reference rules for the operation of the system by the national transmission system operator SEPS. The transmission system (TS) operator has measures available to deal with and prevent states of emergency. The TS operator has a defence plan to prevent major malfunctions, measures for emergency changes of frequency and voltage, as well as a plan to restore the system after any full or partial state without voltage (blackout). If, during operation, there is a change in the system that causes a sudden overload, in order to remove such overload the TS operator  a) will activate purchased support services, b) will use contractually agreed emergency reserves, c) will change the connection of electrical power equipment in the transmission and distribution systems.  A material guarantor for scientific and research tasks Processing of monitoring and analysis of the environment in transport, transition from the Kyoto Protocol to the Paris Agreement and its specifics for the transport sector in the Slovak Republic  Great attention is paid by the TS operator to the issues of safety and reliability. To safeguard these, the following are performed within the Electricity System of the SR:  preventive measures - analysis of network performance calculations and short-circuit calculations, setup of protection systems, optimisation of the switch-off plan, regular maintenance of transmission equipment and the preparation of emergency response measures. Furthermore, there are measures to prevent the spreading of major system failures and measures to eliminate the consequences of major system failures (Defence Plan), measures on operational preparations, and measures to optimise TS maintenance and development,  dispatching measures - emergency assistance, discontinuation of work on TS equipment in coordination with distribution system (DS) operators, use of support and system services, use of emergency response measures, TS reconfiguration,  technical measures - protection system settings, use of support services, the effects of frequency characteristics and automatic voltage regulation.  In addition to the aforementioned emergency measures and their removal, restrictive measures are laid down in the legislation:  a plan to reduce consumption,  an emergency cut-off plan,  a frequency cut-off plan.  The electric power dispatching of the TS operator annually updates the Frequency Cut-off Plan in accordance with RG CE ENTSO E Standards and Recommendations.  Future plans and procedures for security of the electricity supply will be based around, inter alia, the implementation of Regulation (EU) 2019/941 of 5 June 2019, on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector and repealing Directive 2005/89/EC, including the responsibility of the competent authority to prepare a risk-preparedness plan after consultation with stakeholders in order to ensure a common approach to crisis prevention and management.  Gas supply In regard to gas supply security, market participant obligations are addressed in the Energy Act, in Regulation (EU) No 2017/1938 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2017 concerning measures to safeguard the security of gas supply and repealing Regulation (EU) No 994/2010 (the Regulation). Other relevant documents are the Preventive Action Plan and the Emergency Plan, the 2nd revision of which was approved in April 2017. Gas supply standard A distribution system operator who, based on a ministry decision, performs gas supply control tasks in a defined area, a gas supplier and a protected customer who ensures the supply of gas from the European Union or from third countries shall, for the purpose of addressing emergencies, comply with the gas supply standard for protected customers. The gas supply standard means ensuring gas supplies for protected customers within the scope pursuant to the Regulation. Article 6(1) of the Regulation determines the cases in which natural gas undertakings are to ensure the supply of gas to protected customers. These are:  a) extreme temperatures during a 7-day peak period occurring with a statistical probability of once in 20 years, b) any period of 30 days of exceptionally high gas demand, occurring with a statistical probability of once in 20 years; c) a period of 30 days in the event of disruption of the single largest gas infrastructure under average winter conditions. The gas market participants concerned will ensure the above-mentioned gas supply standard using gas inventory in storage facilities by making gas supplies from such storage facilities available in emergencies to a network in the defined territory or through contracted supplies of gas produced in the defined territory. They may also provide up to 50% of the gas volume needed to ensure the gas supply standard using cross-border network capacity through contractually arranged auxiliary emergency gas supplies available in the defined area.  A distribution system operator who, based on a ministry decision, performs gas supply control tasks in a defined area, a gas supplier and a protected customer who ensures the supply of gas from the European Union or from third countries, shall submit a proposal for the method for complying with the gas supply standard to the ministry every year by 28 February for the following period from 1 November to 31 March. The ministry, after discussing the submitted proposals with the Regulatory Office for Network Industries (RONI) and the distribution network operator which, based on a decision by the ministry, performs gas supply control tasks in the defined area, will decide on the method for complying with the gas supply standard by 31 March. The relevant meeting of the Ministry, the RONI and the gas supply control took place on 27 March 2019. The distribution network operator who, based on a ministry decision, performs gas supply control tasks, a gas supplier and a protected customer who ensures the supply of gas from the European Union or from third countries shall submit to the ministry information about compliance with the gas supply standard for the following period from 1 November to 31 March every year by 31 August. If compliance with the gas supply standard is insufficient, the Ministry will impose measures by decision. The Energy Act also laid down the conditions for the management of gas networks. The distribution network in the defined territory of the Slovak Republic is managed by the gas supply control, which is responsible for the operational management of the distribution network. The tasks of the gas supply control in the defined area are fulfilled, based on decision of the Ministry, by the dispatching centre of the distribution network operator, SPP - distribúcia, a. s. The national secondary legislation regulating the conditions for the operation of gas supply control and the procedures in the event of a declaration of emergency, is provided through Decree No 416/2012. Gas supply control performs the following functions in the defined territory of Slovakia: a) it operatively manages its own distribution network and the distribution of gas to the connection points of connected distribution networks, b) it manages interconnected transmission networks and distribution networks in the defined territory during a gas industry emergency and during activities to prevent such an occurrence, c) it technically manages the allocation of gas sources at entry points to connected distribution networks,  d) it declares and cancels an emergency in the gas industry and its level according to the Regulation, e) it declares and cancels restrictive measures in the gas sector pursuant to Section 21 of the Act, f) it lays down measures to remedy an emergency in the gas sector, g) it submits to the Ministry, weekly for the period from 1 November to 31 March and daily in the event of an emergency: for each day, a calculation of the capacity of other infrastructure in the event of a disruption to the largest independent gas infrastructure, including a calculation taking into account appropriate market measures on the consumption side in accordance with a special regulation. An emergency in the gas sector and its level in the defined territory or part of the defined territory is declared and cancelled by the distribution network operator which, based on the Ministrys decision, performs gas supply control tasks in the defined territory, in public mass information systems and using control management resources. Such distribution system operator shall notify the Ministry without delay of  a) the declaration and cancellation of an emergency and its level, b) information about any restrictive measures it plans to adopt, c) additional information, upon request, relating to the declaration of emergency and its level or the restrictive measures, d) information as to whether the emergency may result in the submission of a request for assistance from the European Union and its Member States.  A distribution system operator who, based on a decision from the Ministry, performs gas supply control tasks in a defined territory, shall immediately cancel an emergency upon request from the Ministry.  Where an emergency has been declared, gas market participants shall contribute to the elimination of its causes and consequences.  In connection with the gas supply standard, regulated at European level by the Regulation, so-called risk groups have been determined that associate Member States according to their natural gas sources. The Regulation determines that a Common Risk Assessment will be prepared for the individual risk groups, from which regional chapters relating to regional cooperation or potential coordination procedures during an emergency should be transferred to national plans. Slovakia has been classified in 4 risk groups, while 3 groups are currently active in view of the available transmission infrastructure.  At the same time, each Member State will draw up national documents  Risk Assessment, Preventive Action Plan and Emergency Plan. The Regulation sets out templates for the areas that should be captured in the individual plans as well as the frequency of their preparation. The Risk Assessment will map the risk factors that may affect gas supply to that Member State. In accordance with the identified risks, the Preventive Action Plan will elaborate measures that should mitigate the level of individual risks. The Emergency Plan presents the procedures and processes that need to be followed after the declaration of one of the gas supply emergency levels.  The Regulation also introduces the obligation for solidarity between Member States based on bilateral agreements. However, the conclusion of the relevant agreements between the individual states remains problematic due to several factors. Agreements are regularly discussed at the level of the Gas Coordination Group, as the deadline set by the Regulation for their conclusion has already expired, while the legal form of the agreement, the implementation of a request/offer for/of solidarity assistance, the price and terms of payment in the event of the provision of solidarity and other issues remain problematic. Germany has made most progress in this process, and has also provided its proposals for solutions to other states. In connection with the application of the Regulation, a working group was set up under the aegis of the Slovak Gas and Oil Association and the Slovak Gas Agency, members of which were representatives of the Slovak Ministry of Economy; the Network Regulation Office; SPP, a.s.; SPP - distribúcia, a.s.; NAFTA, a.s.; and eustream, a.s. The aim of the working group was to propose the application of solidarity measures under Article 13. The working group prepared material that included proposals for the resolution of this issue, especially from the perspective of legislation. The material has been submitted to the Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic. ii. National objectives with regard to increasing: the diversification of energy sources and supply from third countries the resilience of regional and national energy systems Oil Oil deliveries to Slovakia and transit across its territory take place reliably and smoothly in line with the volumes agreed in contracts concluded between Slovak and Russian companies. The continuity of oil supplies is ensured in accordance with the Agreement between the Government of the Slovak Republic and the Government of the Russian Federation on Cooperation in Long-term Supplies of Crude Oil from the Russian Federation to the Slovak Republic and the Transit of Russian oil through the Territory of the Slovak Republic, which entered into force on 1 January 2015 and expires on 31 December 2029. The strategic geographical location and the relatively high transport capacity of the Druzhba pipeline in Slovakia are realistic prerequisites for its connection to European transit routes. The Druzhba pipeline connects to the Adria pipeline . Adria is currently used to supply oil brought in by tanker to the port of  The maximum annual capacity is 3.8 million tonnes. After the eventual renovation of the Százhalombatta pumping station and the repair of pipeline defects on - Százhalombatta section, the capacity will be 4.5 million tonnes. In Hungary, annual transport capacity of 6.9 million tonnes is currently available on the Százhalombatta - Croatia border. This capacity is calculated based on the pump capacity at the pumping station in Százhalombatta, while the capacity of the oil pipeline itself is 14 million tonnes per year. The capacity of the Adria oil to  direction) in the event of a loss of supplies through Druzhba is currently sufficient to cover Slovakia consumption. In such a case, the annual transit volume would be between 3 and 3.5 million tonnes of oil. Negotiations are currently under way to find an optimal solution for the Druzhba pipeline link with the Schwechat refinery to minimize possible environmental impacts. Based on the latest survey, an oil pipeline route of 12.814 km with a connection point at a Slovnaft a.s. refinery and ending on the Slovak-Austrian border near Kittsee was recommended.  On the Austrian side, a project for a pipeline that would connect to the Slovak part of the pipeline near Kitsee is currently in its final phase. The necessary building permits have been issued, except for those subject to the demonstration of the purchase of a Right of Way (RoW) through the land concerned, however the Austrian side will also reach a conclusion in this regard. About 98% of the land concerned has been contracted, and intensive negotiations are underway regarding the remainder. The implementation of the pipeline project will ensure strategic interconnection with pipelines in Western Europe. With this step, if reverse pumping from Austria is made available, oil supplies from non-Russian sources will be possible and thus our dependence on oil from the Russian Federation reduced. The importance of the project was taken into account when it was included in the EU list of Projects of Common Interest (PCI). Natural gas The Slovak Republic is an important transit country for natural gas moving from east to west and west to east. There is also a need to complete connections in the north-south direction to retain the Slovak Republic in the pipeline transit of gas. In order to secure gas supplies, both the State and the gas companies are taking steps to better prepare the Slovak Republic for potential gas supply problems to avoid any repeat of the situation that meant limiting gas supplies to Slovak consumers during the gas crisis of 2009. These measures address the options for transporting emergency gas supplies from other directions/countries, including securing auxiliary supplies of gas through reverse flow from the Czech Republic and Austria. These medium-term and long-term measures are mainly aimed at building interconnections between transport networks, providing opportunities for diversification of gas supplies and building or, more exactly, expanding gas storage facilities in Slovakia in suitable geological structures currently available. Since 2009, the Slovak Republic has clearly declared its support for specific projects to increase gas supply security or, more exactly, aimed at finding solutions to interconnect Slovak networks with the networks of neighbouring countries in cases where such an interconnection does not yet exist. Discussions have also been held to make maximum use of EU funds. Slovakia has supported interconnection projects with Poland and Hungary, as well as reverse-flow projects from the Czech Republic and Austria (these are being implemented only on the territory of the Member States referred to but directly impact the possibility to use reverse gas flow in Slovakia). It has also supported a project for technical modifications to enable reverse flow in the Slovak transport network operated by eustream, a.s., and the NAFTA a.s. project, which will enable increasing the volume of gas supplies from storage facilities to the transport network during emergencies. As part of the Slovakia/Hungary interconnection project, the gas pipeline was placed on a standard commercial footing on 1 July 2015 after successful construction and test operations. Diversification of natural gas routes and sources Polish-Slovak interconnection of gas networks project In September 2018, the construction of an interconnection between Slovakia and Poland was started based on the respective agreements between the transmission system operators - eustream, a. s. and GAZ-SYSTEM S.A. It should be put into operation in 2021.  This project is part of the North-South Gas Corridor and forms an important element in the transit pipeline chain linking ECroatian LNG terminal on the island of Krk. The Innovation and Network Executive Agency (INEA), GAZ-SYSTEM S.A. and eustream, a.s. signed a grant agreement in December 2017 for the Poland-Slovakia interconnection pipeline, approximately 106 kilometres of which will be in Slovakia. The grant agreement will enable the Polish and Slovak network operators to use European Union financial support from the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) totalling EUR 104.5 million, while eustream has allocated EUR 52 million for the construction of the Slovak part.  The Eastring project The Eastring pipeline should pass through Slovakia, Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria. On 20 September 2018, the transmission system of the SR operator eustream, a.s. presented the results of the feasibility study for the Eastring gas pipeline, for which it received a CEF grant of 50% of the eligible costs up to EUR 1 million. Based on this, a 1 (Slovakia/Hungary border) and Malkoçlar (Bulgaria/Turkey border) was evaluated as the optimal pipeline option. In terms of the concept to connect Western European markets with the countries of south-eastern Europe in particular, the Eastring gas pipeline project is a solution to achieve the strategic goal of maintaining or even increasing the volume of gas transported through the Slovak transport network. Implementation of the project would significantly contribute towards increasing the importance of Slovakias role as a crossroads for gas connections and its ability to ensure reverse flow gas transport throughout the region. The pipeline, which is designed to be bi-directional, can therefore be considered a route for new potential suppliers, especially from the Caspian region, or from the possible Turkish gas hub, allowing them to access European markets and increase the level of security through diversification of sources. Trading Region Upgrade (TRU) service When forecasting future developments, the eustream, a.s. transmission system operator also monitors long-term trends and estimates for gas consumption throughout the EU. When considering the suitability of projects for implementation, it thus takes into account the security of supplies not only for the Slovak Republic but also for vulnerable regions, such as South-East Europe and Ukraine. Another criterion taken into account is the effort to contribute towards integrating gas markets in the most efficient way, in particular by using existing infrastructure as much as possible. One positive example is the implementation of the TRU service, which connects the Austrian and Czech gas markets through the existing Eustream transmission infrastructure. Thanks to this service, the European Unions efforts to integrate markets in a simple and cost-effective way without unnecessary investment are being put into practice. The first phase of the TRU project was concluded in September 2019. iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to reducing energy import dependency from third countries, for the purpose of increasing the resilience of regional and national energy systems Transit routes and their diversification are described in point ii. Domestic gas extraction  Slovakia has its own domestic gas extraction, providing up to 2% of its total gas consumption. Over the long-term, we can anticipate the continuation of natural gas extraction from existing sources but with a falling trend. Only the discovery of new sources might cause any eventual changes to this trend, however extraction volumes would depend on the scope, character and location of such new deposits. Another vital factor would be the financial aspect of extraction from such deposits. The company NAFTA, a.s. is drilling several exploration wells in various parts of the country. Underground gas storage facilities Slovakia has several suitable geological structures that are used or that can be used as underground storage facilities for natural gas. We consider underground storage facilities to be the most important tool to ensure gas supply security and therefore the resilience of energy systems. Two companies operate underground storage facilities in Slovakia - NAFTA a.s., Bratislava and POZAGAS a.s., Malacky. The total storage capacity of such facilities in the Slovak Republic is 42 547 GWh (meaning almost 4.01 billion m3) (data from the operators as of 1 August 2019), while the maximum daily fixed withdrawal capacity is almost 465 GWh (almost 44 million m3) (the maximum daily withdrawal capacity including interruptible capacity is over 515 GWh (48.5 million m3), while the maximum daily fixed injection capacity is over 410 GWh (38 million m3). The Dolní Bojanovice underground storage facility (in the Czech Republic) operated by the company SPP Storage s.r.o., Prague, with a capacity of 6 944 GWh (0.65 billion m3) and a maximum daily withdrawal capacity of around 95 GWh (8.8 million m3) is also used to supply Slovakia. This storage facility is connected to the Slovak gas network and is independent from the connection equipment used by NAFTA a.s. and POZAGAS a.s. It also has a high degree of flexibility and can switch from injection to withdrawal and back relatively quickly. Projects to convert other suitable geological structures into underground gas storage facilities, respectively to use them in another way for energy-related purposes (CCS), are also under way. The NAFTA a.s. Underground Gas Storage Facility is linked to gas infrastructure projects. The underground gas storage facility at enhance the security of the natural gas supply in the region and accelerate the integration of the markets of EU Member States - Poland, Slovakia and Hungary  including the neighbouring Ukrainian market. In terms of technical characteristics, the project envisages the creation of 340 million m3 of new storage capacity with an estimated withdrawal capacity of 3.75 million m3/day and injection capacity of 3.75 million m3/day. The project will support the European Unions priority gas corridor (NSI East Gas) and will have a significant cross-border impact on neighbouring states. The project is strategically located on the eastern border of the European Union in close proximity to one of the natural gas entry gates to the EU  the compressor station at   at a point where 3 existing and 2 planned pipeline routes meet. There is currently no storage capacity in this part of Slovakia. By building an underground storage facility with a direct connection to the compressor station at  and the intensification of business activities and the gradual transformation of the node into a gas hub are anticipated. The possibility of using waste heat from existing compressors at the to drive the storage compressors is also being considered (assuming gas transit from east to west or sufficient  environmental impact and would not result in an additional increase in greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, the project envisages the possibility of energy storage in the form of a mixture of natural gas and hydrogen. The storage of hydrogen in a mixture with natural gas has the potential to accelerate the use of renewable energy sources, as such storage eliminates the disadvantages of these energy sources (volatility of the amount of energy obtained from renewable sources) and will allow the long-term storage of energy from renewable sources. iv. National objectives with regard to increasing the flexibility of the national energy system, in particular by means of deploying domestic energy sources, demand response and energy storage Electricity sector In terms of ensuring the flexibility of the energy system, one of the Slovak Republics objectives is to provide sufficient flexibility for market participants, primarily for entities with variable generation sources such as renewable energy sources. The basis for this flexibility is trading as close as possible to the moment of physical supply, as variable generation cannot be accurately planned over an extended period of time. Attention will therefore be paid to the development of trading opportunities and their rules, particularly through intra-day and balancing markets.  In connection with increasing the flexibility of the electricity system, it is the intention of the Slovak Republic  in line with the aforementioned European legislation  to create conditions for the provision of support services which, based on clearly defined rules, will allow the aggregation of collection facilities, energy storage facilities and electricity generating facilities for the purpose of offering regulatory services. Rules and appropriate conditions will also be established for the owners of the collection facilities, third parties and owners of conventional and renewable energy sources, as well as the owners of energy storage facilities, to become regulatory service providers. The aim is to ensure full and equal access for all technologies and suppliers, including renewable sources, to balancing markets. At the same time, the Slovak Republic is interested in supporting a shortening of the currently used trading intervals on daily, intraday and balancing markets. Shortening trading intervals will make it possible to contribute towards better management of the interconnected electricity system as well as towards the integration of a higher proportion of intermittent sources in total production. From the point of view of system power regulation, the Slovak Republic supports a shortening of the activation period of balance support services by 2023, which will lead to an increased management dynamic and grid flexibility. A problem for the SR in terms of providing flexibility in electricity generation is the installed capacity of its power plants, which are able to flexibly react to current system requirements. The increasing share of volatile renewable sources in electricity generation means that the transmission system operator is encountering problems in managing the electricity system due to failure to meet the required support service volumes in some months of the year. The operation of photovoltaic and wind power plants creates increased demands on support services and it will be necessary to ensure the operation of sources with adequate regulatory capacities for their further development. In the regulatory area in the SR, electricity consumption control is also used to ensure sufficient supply volumes  this is tertiary regulation by reducing the power consumption of a selected electricity consumer and tertiary regulation by increasing the power consumption of a selected electricity consumer.  Participation in the Grid Control Cooperation (e-GCC) cross-border exchange project at the start of 2012 improved the security of the electricity system operation, and in particular reduced the need to activate the Secondary Power Regulation and the number of Tertiary Power Regulation activations. Gas sector It is necessary to create an appropriate environment to ensure the flexibility of energy storage and accumulation operators. It is necessary to exploit the advantages of the underground storage facilities in the SR and the centralised heat supply system to the greatest possible extent. Slovakia has underground gas storage facilities in the southwestern part of the country that play an important role in balancing disparities between gas supply and demand, and during peak demand. Gas storage facilities can be considered the most important tool in terms of gas supply security. Their operators currently provide natural gas storage services for several foreign gas companies. The company NAFTA a.s. has two projects to develop underground storage facilities prepared. One of these is a new facility in the east of Slovakia  parameters: working volume 0.34 billion m3, withdrawal and injection capacity 3.75 million m3/day) at The other project is the expansion of the existing Láb complex (anticipated technical parameters: working volume 0.55 billion m3, increase in withdrawal capacity by 10 million m3/day and injection capacity by 8 million m3/day). However, the implementation of these projects will depend on the situation in the natural gas storage market as well as on obtaining financial support from European Union sources. Linking sectors The development of energy storage will ensure the integration of variable RES into the system. Such a system will allow the storage of locally produced energy and its consumption according to demand. Integrating local energy storage in accumulation appliances, energy storage facilities and electric vehicles or in the gas distribution network with its storage capabilities is therefore an important element of the smart grid. In addition to energy storage, local power consumption management concepts are being developed based on good mapping and analysis of the ratios in the system so that electricity is not transformed to a higher voltage at the generation site and then back to a lower voltage at a remote location. Ensuring a flexible, low-carbon and sustainable electricity generation base will require first and foremost maintaining and supporting the existing capacity and operation of pumped-storage power plants, and possibly assessing the possible increase in storage capacity by building a new pumped-storage power plant. Heating sector In the heating sector there will be support for efficient district heating systems with heat supplied from RES, waste heat from industrial processes making cost-intensive use of RES, especially locally available biomass/biomethane and waste, including support for multi-fuel systems as well as heat pumps, which, as a form of RES, make it possible to significantly save on heat generation costs. The option to create conditions for the use of heating plants to supply electricity in emergencies will be considered. District cogeneration heating systems will be preferred over the generation of electricity from fossil fuels without the use of heat. Their operation is necessary so that they can be used for the provision of regulatory electricity as much as possible. It is necessary to use heating plant infrastructure for the integration of RES into district heating systems in the form of electricity and heat generation from biomethane (coming primarily from waste from plant and animal production,  from the biodegradable part of municipal waste, the biodegradable part of kitchen and restaurant waste, and waste from waste water treatment plants), energy recovery from municipal waste as part of the circular economy, and energy efficient equipment using RES that meet sustainability criteria. 2.4. Dimension: internal energy market; 2.4.1. Electricity interconnectivity  i. The level of electricity interconnectivity that the Member State aims for in 2030 in consideration of the electricity interconnection target for 2030 of at least 15%, with a strategy with the level from 2021 onwards defined in close cooperation with affected Member States, taking into account the 2020 interconnection target of 10% and the following indicators of the urgency of action: The SR will fulfil the 10% target for EU Member States transmission interconnection level by 2020 adopted by the EU Council in 2002, as well as the 15% interconnectivity level by 2030 set by the EU Council in 2014 as the share of net import transmission capacity to total installed electricity generation capacity in the Member State. Based on the Commission communication on Strengthening Energy Networks16, the Slovak Republic achieved a 43% transmission system interconnection level in 2017, and in 2020  according to the 2016 ten-year pan-European network development plan (TYNDP 2016)  it will reach a 59% interconnection level in 2020. In 2030, according to the TYNDP 2016 assumptions, the level of SR interconnection will decrease to 52%, mainly due to the projected increase in installed electricity generation capacity. The Slovak Republic will also fulfil the indicative indicators of the target for interconnection of the transmission systems of the Member States of the European Union to 2030, according to the Commission report17 of November 2017, which states that the nominal transmission capacity, i.e. the thermal capacity of a Member States cross-border interconnection, should amount to at least 30% of the maximum load in the import direction and 30% of the installed renewable energy output in the export direction, while the average annual difference in the marginal cost of trading zones should be no greater than EUR 2/MWh. According to the TYNDP 2018 analysis18, in the first two criteria