2.5. Dimension: Research, innovation and competitiveness i. National objectives and funding targets for public and, where available, private research and innovation relating to the Energy Union, including, where appropriate, a timeframe for when the objectives are to be met  The Slovak Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport annually performs an In-depth Analysis of the Energy Technology Development, Development and Innovation in the Slovak Republic for the International Energy Agency, working with the OECD.  In order to obtain relevant information on the financing of energy research in Slovakia, the Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the SR approaches relevant institutions (the Slovak Academy of Sciences, the Research and Development Agency, the Research Agency, the Slovak Innovation and Energy Agency, the Statistical Office of the SR, the Ministry of Economy of the SR, the Ministry of the Environment of the SR, the Ministry of Agriculture and Regional Development of the SR, National Centre for Research and Applications of RES, the National Forestry Centre - Forest Research Institute in Zvolen, the National Agricultural and Food Centre, Horizon 2020, etc.), which have up-to-date information on R&D projects financed from the state budget, from European Union sources and from private sources.  The analysis of other years shows that within the Slovak Republic, EUR 20.351 million were spent on research and development in 2014; 2015 - EUR 2.944 million; 2016 - EUR 18.451 million; and 2017  EUR 1.02 million. Draft State R&D programmes for 2020-2024 with outlook to 2029 (material prepared for government approval)  The proposal assumes funding for R&D in key areas of the Slovak economy, which include the following areas: Improving the transmission capabilities and security of the Slovak electricity grid; Smart grids and renewable energy sources and nuclear energy. In the 2020-2024 time-scale, R&D support for these areas is indicated in Table 25. Table 25: Energy security of the Slovak Republic with emphasis on optimal multi-sourcing, energy efficiency and the environment State programme: Energy security of the Slovak Republic, emphasising multiple sourcing,  energy efficiency and the environment (mil. EUR*) year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total* State Budget 17.9 21.0 21.6 18.9 4.6 84.1 of which current expenditure 5.7 13.4 21.6 18.9 4.6 64.2 of which capital expenditure 12.2 7.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 19.9 indicatively non-budget resources 6.0 7.3 7.5 6.5 1.6 28.8 total eligible expenditure 23.9 28.3 29.0 25.4 6.2 112.8 Source Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the Slovak Republic  Table 25 shows as assumption of indicative extra-budgetary resources of approx. EUR 28.8 mil. for 2020-2024 as a result of private sector R&D investments in the area concerned, with additional  research and development expenditure indicated in the 2025-2029 outlook as indicated in the following Table 26.    Table 26: Indicative additional R&D expenditure  Year 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 Total State Budget 16.819 17.155 17.498 17.848 18.205 87.525 Source Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the Slovak Republic  Slovak Research and Development Agency (SRDA) In 2018, the SRDA launched a public call for applications to address R&D projects in individual groups of science and technology fields. The agencys primary objective is to increase the quality of R&D through competition from all applicants in a competitive environment, taking into account the priorities of the government-approved R&D Strategy Knowledge for Prosperity - Research and Innovation Strategy for Smart Specialisation of the Slovak Republic.  The total amount of funding earmarked for the entire period of projects supported under this call is EUR 33 million. These funds were allocated according to the requirements of individual groups of science and technology fields. The total value of funds provided by the Agency to address any one project is limited to a maximum of EUR 250 000 for the whole period.  Information on approved R&D projects in individual areas as well as information on the value of the subsidy granted for R&D projects in the energy sector is available at: https://www.apvv.sk/grantove-schemy/vseobecne-vyzvy/vv-018.html?tab=promoted_projects National Centre for Research and Applications of RES In the field of RES there is the National Centre for Research and Applications of RES at the Slovak Technical University (STU). The Slovak Technical University has received support for this from the European Regional Development Fund under the Operational Programme Research and Development. Four STU faculties are involved in the project of the National Centre for RES Research and Application: the Faculty of Chemical and Food Technology, the Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Informatics, the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, the Faculty of Civil Engineering. The focal points of the National Centres research are biomass, solar energy and hydropower Intelligent Network Research Laboratory There is interest in setting up a laboratory for smart grid research. The role of the laboratory would be testing new network, consumption, production and interoperability technologies. The laboratory should also be a representative centre for public awareness. Research and development targets The priority of research and development in the energy sector is to ensure sustainable energy in Slovakia. The objectives of energy research and development are in line with the Research and Innovation Strategy for Smart Specialisation of the Slovak Republic. (2013). Research and development in this area will focus on new and renewable, environmentally-friendly energy sources, the rationalisation of energy consumption in all sectors of the economy and on energy distribution, such as:  exploration of domestic deposits of energy raw materials, geo-thermal energy and their efficient use;   development of technologies for the generation of electricity and heat from RES (water, sun, wind, biomass and geothermal energy);  development of energy storage and energy conversion technologies (POWER to X) to interconnect sectors;  nuclear energy research focusing on safety and the disposal of spent fuel;  research into fourth-generation reactors and the problems of nuclear fusion (participation of SR in the global ITER and DEMO projects);  development of new energy transmission systems (power cables without dispersive electrical and magnetic fields);  development of technologies to increase energy efficiency and reduce energy intensity.  ii. Where available, national 2050 objectives related to the promotion of clean energy technologies and, where appropriate, national objectives, including long-term targets (2050) for deployment of low-carbon technologies, including for decarbonising energy and carbon-intensive industry sectors and, where applicable, for related carbon transport and storage infrastructure The promotion of clean technologies to 2050 is under development. iii. Where applicable, national objectives with regard to competitiveness  The aim is to reduce the costs of high energy-intensive enterprises in relation to electricity payments that are used to finance the production of electricity from renewable sources. The aim of the compensation is to reduce costs for electricity-intensive enterprises arising from high electricity payments. Pursuant to Section 6a(1)(a) of Act No 309/2009 and Annex No 1 of the Ministry Decree, compensation may be granted to an authorized legal person or natural person - entrepreneur that meets the criteria set out in the above-mentioned legislative framework. Until 31 August 2019, enterprises meeting the statutory criteria and included in the list of eligible industries could apply for compensation from the Ministry of Economy of the Slovak Republic for the system operation tariff (SOT). The granting of compensation for the system operation tariff to eligible energy-intensive enterprises was subject to a notification process, and the aid itself  the provision of funds  will be implemented after the issue of the European Commission decision through which the Commission confirmed the compliance of this measure with the relevant State aid rules in September 2019. With this partial refund, the ME SR is trying to reduce the costs of electricity-intensive enterprises arising from high electricity payments. Compensation has been requested by 77 enterprises operating, for example, in the metallurgy and steel sector, in the manufacture of various metals, stationery, cement, plastics, dyes, refined petroleum products, etc. The ME SR has at its disposal EUR 40 million for this purpose in 2019. It will divide this amount into the total amount of supported electricity identified after the aggregation of all applications from enterprises meeting the set criteria. These include, in particular, annual electricity consumption over  1 GWh, a share of gross value added through the eligible activities of at least 50% of the total value of the enterprise, the proper payment of the SOT, etc. 3. POLICIES AND MEASURES 3.1. Dimension: decarbonisation 3.1.1. GHG emissions and removals  i. Policies and measures to achieve the target set under Regulation (EU) 2018/842 as referred in point 2.1.1 and policies and measures to comply with Regulation (EU) 2018/841, covering all key emitting sectors and sectors for the enhancement of removals, with an outlook to the long-term vision and goal to become a low emission economy and achieving a balance between emissions and removals in accordance with the Paris Agreement This chapter provides information on the most important policies and measures for reducing greenhouse gas emissions with a base year of 2016. It describes both existing and planned measures. a) Sectoral policies and measures in the energy sector - In addition to the legislative instruments on the trading of greenhouse gas emission allowances, an important role is played by Act No 137/2010, on air protection, as amended, which serves to control and regulate emission limits through the introduction of emission limits for basic air pollutants. This Act is supplemented by Act No 401/1998, on air pollution charges, which serves as an economic tool to reduce emissions. Improving energy efficiency - Measures on the energy consumption side, pursuant to which energy savings are seen as a reduction in final energy consumption. These measures are broken down by sector (buildings, industry, public sector, transport and appliances). The measures set minimum requirements as regards the energy performance of new and existing buildings, and the renovation of buildings, the most important sources of potential energy savings to 2030. Greenhouse gases affected: CO2 Type of measure: regulatory  Condition: in force since 2014 Implemented in scenario: WEM Implementation of the EU Winter Package - The Winter Package, part of the implementation of the Energy Union, promotes the transition to clean energy and takes into account the impact of RES on heat and electricity generation. It is anticipated that the RES Directive will need to be revised and concrete recommendations will be prepared to meet the EU target of a 32% share of renewable energy in total consumption by 2030. Greenhouse gases affected: CO2 Type of measure: regulatory and economic Condition: in force since 2016 Implemented in scenario: WEM National Action Plan for Renewable Energy, Government Resolution No 677/2010 - The RES Action Plan sets out Slovakias national targets for the percentage of renewable energy consumed in the transport, electricity and heat and cooling sectors in 2020, the trajectories of anticipated growth in the use of RES in each sector in the 2010-2020 period, the measures to achieve the objectives, support systems, and the total anticipated contribution of measures for individual technologies to produce renewable energy and to achieve binding efficiency and energy savings targets. The RES Action Plan set RES targets (including for biomass, support for fast-growing tree species, and regulatory measures for technological innovation in timber felling, etc