Summary  This report deals with two different schemes of social protection, namely “unemployment assistance” (UA) provided by the national statutory unemployment insurance  scheme , and the minimum income schemes implemented by the federal provinces, through  a benefit called “ means -tested minimum income” (MMI) or “ social assistance” (SA) (depending on fe deral province). UA is included in this report , as this insurance -based benefit is, in principle, available for an indefinite period of time ; and it therefore to some degree (and more so than in many other countries)  substitutes  for minimum income benefits  in the narrow sense.  UA and MMI/SA together are likely to have a very substantial impact on poverty alleviation and on reducing the poverty gap faced by recipient households. However, at the same time some substantial challenges are evident.  Unlike  unemployment insurance benefits in many countries, UA is in principle available without a maximum time limit . But for many recipients , benefit caps apply ; and low benefit levels, resulting from the largely linear benefit formula, mean that  top-up payments  from MMI/SA  are very common . Furthermore, it should be borne  in mind that UA is only granted to people who are fit and available for work.  At the same time, as shown in Section 3 of this report, the benefit levels of MMI/SA (together with universal family  allowance) usually only just about reach the level of the extreme poverty threshold (40% of median equivalised household income), and households that receive MMI/SA are much more often affected by severe material deprivation than other groups. Furthermore , non -take -up of MMI/SA, estimated at around 30% despite improvements during the last decade, remains a problem.1 A general major challenge is caused by the governance structure of MMI/SA . The Basic Social Assistance Act of 2019 stipulates maximum rather than minimum standards, and essentially no  minimum national standards exist anymore. At the same time legislati on by the federal provinces on MMI/SA  exhibits  substantial variations  regarding concrete rules on access, benefit levels, and implementation proc edures. Evidently,  irrespective of attempts to conduct regular exchange between the federal provinces on the implementation of MMI/SA,  the situation is marked by a lack  of effective  national co -ordination , and by  an element of  legal uncertainty.  Another po int worth stressing is that it appears that the institutions responsible for implementing MMI/SA  usually do not offer an integrated provision of targeted social services , and also lack the resources to serve as a well -established link to other providers of  such services. The same holds for the Public Employment Service (PES), which concentrates on active labour market policies (ALMPs) and has no adequate resources and accurate knowledge to provide case -management in the broader sense, including other types of targeted social services. This means that recipients of UA and of MMI/SA  often have to inform themselves about additional advice and support made available by the different other providers of social services, of which many are social NGOs. Overall, the landscape of such service -providers appears to be rather fragmented in many federal provinces.  Unlike  targeted social services in the broader sense, assistance in accessing the labour market appears to be rather well organ ised via the PES , offering a wide range of different ALMP measures. Thereby, the PES deals both with recipients of UA and with recipients of MMI/SA  (if they are available and fit for gainful employment).  Overall, it should be stressed that there is only limited additional  empirical evidenc e on the actual impact and broader outcomes of MMI/SA , and its actual interaction with UA. This is  caused  by, amongst other things,  the substantial variations  between the  1 Fuchs et al . (2019; 2020).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  MMI/SA  schemes of the federal provinces, which makes proper evaluation difficult and resource intensive.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other  benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in p lace; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes  that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context  in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.   1 