Links with labour market activation  Recipients of UA are in all cases registered with the Public Employment Service (PE S; Arbeitsmarktservice ). For them, regarding active labour market policy (ALMP), the same rules apply as for people receiving UB. Both groups have – irrespective of short -term illness – to be fit and available for work. No tapering of benefits from unemployment insurance exists . However, recipients of UB and UA are allowed to have earned income from employment up to the marginal earnings threshold of social insurance, without losing their benefits. In 2021, the marginal earnings threshold amounted to €475.86 gross per month and it is indexed on a yearly basis.  For recipients of both UA and UB , an individualised "supervision agreement" (Betreuungsvereinbarung ) with the PES is obligatory. Amongst other things, it covers  planned participation in  ALMP  measures.  Recipients of UA have , in principle, access to the same ALMP measures as recipients of UB. However, some measures are explicitly targeted at the long -term unemployed. More generally, the PES provides three main types of ALMP, as follows:   “Qualification” – for unemployed peopl e as well as for people in active employment.   “Employment promotion”, for example via company integration subsidies (i.e. wage subsidies for employers of former long -term unemployed  people ; short -time work benefits; employment projects, such as  providing training and jobs in socio -economic enterprises and other employment projects; labour foundations; and mobility subsidies ).   “Support” – with a wide range of different measures applied (e.g. including different types of counselling for both the long -term u nemployed and employers ). These ALMP instruments are also accessible by recipients of  MMI /SA, if they are fit and available for work and therefore registered with the PES  (for an overview see also Heitzmann/Matzinger 2020; Meier/Tiefenbacher 2019) .  25 In Carinthia, two different benefit leve ls exist for the heating allowance, according to two different household  income thresholds. €110 is granted to households with a low income, and € 180 to households with a very low  income . For more details see:  https://www.ktn.gv.at/Verwaltung/Amt -der -Kaerntner -Landesregierung/Abteilung -4/Heizzuschuss .  26 https://vorarlberg.at/ -/heizkostenzuschuss   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  Accordi ng to legislation in  the federal provinces, MMI/SA  recipients  who are  fit and available for work have to register with the PES. This means that they also have an individualised supervision agreement with the PES. Furthermore, the MMI/SA  acts of federal pro vinces also partly address some type s of "case management", "integration plans" or "integration agreements" etc. to be organ ised by the institutions responsible for MMI/SA in the federal provinces,27 in which benefit recipients have to participate. However , it appears that the actual implementation of such measures  varies to a considerable degree between federal provinces, and that they only apply to specific groups of benefit recipients (i.e. in the  first instance to those supposed to be available for work ).  According to data provided by the PES , a total of 94,001 recipients of MMI /SA were registered with the PES as unemployed in 2020 .28 Of these, 47,739 (51% ) participated in ALMP  measure s; 27,677 participated in qualification measures, and 8,030 participated  in "employment incentives ". Around  15,256 managed to find a job (nearly half  of these cases were accounted for by  an ALMP  measure of the employment incentive type ) (Arbeitsmarktservice 2021).  If recipients of MMI/SA  do not comply with ALMP or other activation measures they may be sanctioned by the welfare offices, according to  the MMI/SA  acts of the federal provinces. According to the Basic Social Assistance Act , the Federal Provinces ha ve to establish “efficient” control and sanctioning mechanisms, which shall – especially - apply in cases, where recipients do not comply with activation measures/are unwilling to take on a job. However, the Act does not stipulate specific requirements on the level of deductions or determines predefined percentages for the benefit reduction (except for violations of integration obligations).  Therefore, the sanctioning regimes differ to a considerable degree in the Federal Provinces . Sanction were  imposed on  a total of  3,478 recipients of MMI/SA  in 2020.29 In case of  sanctions and related benefit  reductions by the PES (concerning recipients with low benefit levels from unemployment insurance and top -up by MMI/SA), the relevant regulations for MMI/SA recipients do not provide for compensation in the (full) amount of the se benefit reductions . Accord ing to the Basic Social Assistance Act claimants can receive SA up to  a maximum of 50% of the difference ( so-called partial compensation). Yet, t he implementation by Federal Provinces is quite heterogeneous regarding this point . Concerning tapering of bene fits for recipients of MMI/SA  who take up gainful employment , a framework has been in place since 2010 ( under  an agreement between the Federal Republic and the federal provinces according to paragraph 15a of the Austrian Constitution). The Basic Social Ass istance Act of 2019 also allows  for tapering of MMI/SA  benefits when  recipients  start work again. According to paragraph 7(6) of the 2019  act,  up to 35% of the income earned by MMI/SA recipients who start gainful employment may be disregarded  for means -testing . However, it appears that the different federal provinces have used this option to very differing  extents. According to data collected by Statistics Austria, this kind of tapering was overall used in 2,373 cases in 2020, of which 1,259 were  in Salzbur g, and only one in Vienna (data for   27 I.e. the responsible unit of m unicipal administration in Vienna and of the district authorities  in the other federal provinces.  28 This figure is higher than the yearly average of recipients of MMI/SA indicated in Section 1.3 above. This is due the fact that it indicates the yearly sum of recipients of MMI/SA registered with the PES, not the yearly average number.  29 Statistik Austria: https://www.statistik.at/wcm/idc/idcplg?IdcService=GET_NATIVE_FILE&RevisionSelectionMethod=LatestReleased&dDocName=068823 .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  15  Lower Austria, Styria and Vorarlberg are missing).30 These data indicate that this instrument overall is of minor importance only.  3 