Governance mechanisms  Between 2010 and 2019 the minimum inco me scheme in the narrow sense was usually called MMI , which  replaced the earlier minimum income scheme called SA. This resulted from the 15a treaty, which outlined the most important features, basic principles and minimum standards of the MMI.31 At the sam e time legislative responsibility remained with the federal provinces, each of which ha d its own legislati on on minimum income. The 15a treaty expired at the end of 2016, and the Federal Republic and the federal provinces could not find a compromise on a r enewed agreement.  This meant that the competency for the MMI scheme then was in principle again completely located at the level of the federal provinces and that the short period of formal co -ordination had come to an end. However, in spring 2019 the nati onal centre -right coalition government of the Austrian People’s Party and the Austrian Freedom Party introduced the  Basic Social Assistance Act. However, different from the earlier 15a treaty, the act d id not define minimum standards, but instead set  maxim um standards that could not be exceeded  by the minimum income schemes of the federal provinces, which continue to be regulated in more detail in the legislation (MMI/SA  acts) of the federal provinces.   30 Statistik Austria: https://pic.statistik.at/wcm/idc/idcplg?IdcService=GET_NATIVE_FILE&RevisionSelectionMethod=LatestReleased&dDocName=068823 .  31 For the full text of  the treaty  and additional parliamentary material  see:  https://www.parlament.gv.at/PAKT/VHG /XXIV/I/I_00677/index.shtml . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  16  As already mentioned in Section 1.1 of this report, in December 2019 the Constitutional Court abolished parts of the Basic Social Assistance Act (amongst other things maximum benefit levels for children) on the grounds that they  violat ed the Austrian National Constitution ( Bundesverfassung ).32 However , the cur rent coalition government of the Austrian Peoples’ Party and the Green Party, in office since early January 2020, has  not address ed this issue, meaning that parts of the Basic Social Assistance Act have just been suspended by the Constitutional Court without being replaced.  Furthermore, until November 2021 only six out of nine federal provinces (Lower Austria, Upper Austria, Salzburg, Styria, Carinthia, and Vorarlberg) have changed their legislation on MMI/SA  to bring it into line with the Basic Social Assistance Act. In Vienna, some  provisions of the act were  implemented, and in Tyrol and Burgenland no major changes  were introduced . Regulations that are not in line with the Basic Social Assistance Act could theoretically be challen ged  by the Federal Government before the Constitutional Court. However, no such step ha s been taken hitherto.  The concrete implementation of MMI/SA  is in the competency at the responsible unit of the municipal administration ( Magistrat ) in Vienna and of th e district authorities in the other federal provinces. In addition to the legislative acts on MMI/SA , the federal provinces also issue more concrete implementation guidelines ( Vollzugshandbücher ) and partly also decrees on specific questions.  Overall, rega rding MMI/SA , the current situation is marked by a lack  of co-ordination, legal uncertainty ,33 and substantial differentiation between the federal provinces. The programme of the current coalition government does not include  any proposal  to settle this dis satisfactory and problematic situation. It appears that the two coalition partners could not find a common understanding on this issue. They obviously “agreed not to agree” and decided to leave the issue untouched.  ALMP and financial benefits provided in t he context of unemployment insurance, such as UB and UA, are the sole responsibility of the Federal Republic. Actual implementation is by the PES, where most of the planning for ALMP is also done both at national and regional levels. The concrete interacti on with clients takes place at the local offices of the PES, of which there is currently a total of 104 (Arbeitsmarktservice 2021, 5).  For recipients of MMI/SA who are also registered with the PES, a regular exchange of data takes place between the PES an d the institutions responsible for MMI/SA at the level of the federal provinces. This is, however, not done for the purpose of monitoring but to check compliance with the recipients’ obligations with respect to measures from the PES.  5 