Governance mechanisms  The integration income benefit is established at federal level (FPSSI) but granted locally by the PCSW ( Centre public d'action sociale  – CPAS  and  Open baar Centrum voor Maatschappelijk Welzijn  – OCMW ). At federal level, the parliament is responsible for the legal framework, but most of the decisions are taken by the Minister for Social Integration, supported by the FPSSI, through royal decrees and circul ar letters. The labour courts have delivered case law concerning minimum income schemes. This jurisprudence steers the interpretation of the legal framework.    The integration income scheme relies on shared funding by the federal state and PCSWs (and the municipalities in the case of deficits). The federal state covers 55% of the integration income; 65% for PCSWs who have at least 500 beneficiaries and 75% if these see an increase of 5% or more compared with the previous year. For ex -homeless people and re fugees, the federal state reimburses 100% of the integration income. An extra 10% reimbursement of integration income is paid in the case of the PIIS during one calendar year (or two in case of very vulnerable clients), or during the whole period for stude nts.  Regional services are responsible for the legal framework and the delivery of services for ALMP and supporting (social) services.  The most important role is for the PCSWs, which are responsible for the effective delivery of social integration income t o claimants. There is one PCSW per municipality. Services such as additional financial support, food aid, psychological support, debt mediation and medical help are also delivered at municipality level by PCSWs. PCSWs are also in charge of referral of inte gration income recipients to other social services provided by local organisations, and to labour market services (mainly organised by the PES). There are 581 PCSWs in Belgium, and 19 in the Brussels Capital Region. Within PCSWs, the social welfare council  is the main decision -making body for (dis)approval of applications for the guaranteed minimum income or sanctioning of minimum benefit recipients. The integrated approach to all aspects of the social integration of minimum income recipients enhances the e fficiency of the delivery arrangements. The fact that there is considerable autonomy and discretionary power for PCSWs, in the delivery of integration income as well as in providing socio -professional and social integration services, makes arrangements fle xible in their response to the social conditions and the needs of the people who are beneficiaries. But at the same time, this autonomy exacerbates the unequal treatment of claimants based on their residence (Schepers and Nicaise, 2015), including with reg ard to implementation of PIISs (Albertijn et al ., 2021b).  Statistical data, especially on the right to social integration, integration income benefits, PIISs, additional financial support, and socio -professional integration exemptions, are collected at the  level of the FPSSI and regularly published on their Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  19  website. Additional qualitative evaluations of policy measures initiated by the FPSSI, such as evaluations of the use of PIISs, social activation through projects, such as Miriam and PSA, funded by the F PSSI are also currently available. However, data and evaluations in respect of the socio -professional and social integration of beneficiaries of integration income are scarce and not systematic, in cases where these measures are not funded through the FPSS I. Since the regionalisation of labour market activation measures such as Art. 60§7 and 61, and due to the fact that most ALMPs fall under the competence of regional authorities, it has become extremely difficult to come across quantitative statistical dat a a qualitative evaluation reports on the outcomes of activation and the impact of access to social services for integration income recipients. Co -operation agreements exist between regional PES and PCSWs, but these only provide very general guidelines for  co-operation.  5 Impact of minimum income  schemes  The impact of social protection on poverty in Belgium is generally considered to be substantial. However, over the last five years, the protective capacity of social transfers has decreased, especially amon g the working -age population. If one assesses the distributional capacity of social transfers by comparing AROP  rates before and after transfers, we see that social transfers (excluding pensions) accounted for a reduction in poverty rates of 45 -46% between  2006 and 2012, 43 -44% between 2013 and 2015, and then down to 42%, 40% and only 35% for 2016, 2017 and 2018 respectively (Van Lancker and  Cantillon, 2021). The ero sion  of social protection in Belgium is confirmed in the annual monitoring report that the F PSS P produces in the context of the Europe 2020 target on the reduction of poverty and social exclusion. The subtitle of the 2019 report, ‘slowly falling behind’, attempts to draw the attention to a key trend. Within the context of a highly developed Belgi an welfare state, the indicators point to income inequality figures that are stable and among the lowest in the EU, while at the same time showing an increasing poverty rate (FOD SZ, 2019).  There are many factors that explain this significant weakening of  social protection systems However, an important explanation lies in the reduction of the generosity and eligibility of social protection for the active population, especially in the case of long -term unemployment, including people on integration income. I n particular for (quasi -)jobless households with children, social allowances appear to be inadequate. For these households the poverty risk exceeds 80% (Van Lancker and  Cantillon , 2021).  Between 2010 and 2017, the effectiveness of social minima43, including integration income, did not improve. In fact, indexation and welfare adaptation contributed to a slight increase in real terms and in purchasing power, but the increase of the AROP threshold and the increase in the numbers of beneficiaries of i ntegration income led to an increase of the number of  people living on social minima  who were living on an income below the poverty risk threshold . The situation changes for the period between 2018 and January 2021. The welfare envelope and the first step in the planned increase of social minima (2.68% in 2021, out of a total increase of 10.75% over the period 2021 to 2024), resulted in a strong increase in the effectiveness of social minima. For single people  on integration income, the effectiveness of net  disposable income44 increased from 74% of the AROP rate to 79%; for single parents , from 87% to 91% ; and for couples with children , from 67% to 70%45.  However, even after the planned increases of social minima in the coming years, the disposable income o f people living on integration income will remain below the AROP  43 See footnote 12 for the definition of social minima.  44 Net disposable househo ld income is calculated as integration income + child allowances and social supplements (under competence of the regions), after taxes.  45 Cijfers in de kijker  – nr 8 02/2021 (belgium.be)   