Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  19  website. Additional qualitative evaluations of policy measures initiated by the FPSSI, such as evaluations of the use of PIISs, social activation through projects, such as Miriam and PSA, funded by the F PSSI are also currently available. However, data and evaluations in respect of the socio -professional and social integration of beneficiaries of integration income are scarce and not systematic, in cases where these measures are not funded through the FPSS I. Since the regionalisation of labour market activation measures such as Art. 60§7 and 61, and due to the fact that most ALMPs fall under the competence of regional authorities, it has become extremely difficult to come across quantitative statistical dat a a qualitative evaluation reports on the outcomes of activation and the impact of access to social services for integration income recipients. Co -operation agreements exist between regional PES and PCSWs, but these only provide very general guidelines for  co-operation.  5 Impact of minimum income  schemes  The impact of social protection on poverty in Belgium is generally considered to be substantial. However, over the last five years, the protective capacity of social transfers has decreased, especially amon g the working -age population. If one assesses the distributional capacity of social transfers by comparing AROP  rates before and after transfers, we see that social transfers (excluding pensions) accounted for a reduction in poverty rates of 45 -46% between  2006 and 2012, 43 -44% between 2013 and 2015, and then down to 42%, 40% and only 35% for 2016, 2017 and 2018 respectively (Van Lancker and  Cantillon, 2021). The ero sion  of social protection in Belgium is confirmed in the annual monitoring report that the F PSS P produces in the context of the Europe 2020 target on the reduction of poverty and social exclusion. The subtitle of the 2019 report, ‘slowly falling behind’, attempts to draw the attention to a key trend. Within the context of a highly developed Belgi an welfare state, the indicators point to income inequality figures that are stable and among the lowest in the EU, while at the same time showing an increasing poverty rate (FOD SZ, 2019).  There are many factors that explain this significant weakening of  social protection systems However, an important explanation lies in the reduction of the generosity and eligibility of social protection for the active population, especially in the case of long -term unemployment, including people on integration income. I n particular for (quasi -)jobless households with children, social allowances appear to be inadequate. For these households the poverty risk exceeds 80% (Van Lancker and  Cantillon , 2021).  Between 2010 and 2017, the effectiveness of social minima43, including integration income, did not improve. In fact, indexation and welfare adaptation contributed to a slight increase in real terms and in purchasing power, but the increase of the AROP threshold and the increase in the numbers of beneficiaries of i ntegration income led to an increase of the number of  people living on social minima  who were living on an income below the poverty risk threshold . The situation changes for the period between 2018 and January 2021. The welfare envelope and the first step in the planned increase of social minima (2.68% in 2021, out of a total increase of 10.75% over the period 2021 to 2024), resulted in a strong increase in the effectiveness of social minima. For single people  on integration income, the effectiveness of net  disposable income44 increased from 74% of the AROP rate to 79%; for single parents , from 87% to 91% ; and for couples with children , from 67% to 70%45.  However, even after the planned increases of social minima in the coming years, the disposable income o f people living on integration income will remain below the AROP  43 See footnote 12 for the definition of social minima.  44 Net disposable househo ld income is calculated as integration income + child allowances and social supplements (under competence of the regions), after taxes.  45 Cijfers in de kijker  – nr 8 02/2021 (belgium.be)   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  20  threshold (see Annex 3). On the basis of household budgets, the Covivat consortium (Cantillon et al ., 2020) tested the adequacy of minimum benefits and minimum wages in the face of extra expe nses related to the COVID -19 crisis. The research showed that single -parent families living on a social integration income had incomes that were only sufficient to cover expenses that could not be delayed. For single people the integration income was not e ven enough to cover expenses for food, housing and personal care. These conclusions were confirmed in the CEBUD study (Frederickx et al., 2021), which illustrated (by using reference budgets) that only in the case of households able to access social housin g did their net disposable income from integration income benefits exceed the level of the reference budget developed for their type of household.  It is very difficult to assess the real impact of integration efforts for beneficiaries of integration income . The official data provide information of the number of PIISs concluded; there are some data on the effect of referring integration income beneficiaries to the specific employment programmes of the regional PES (see TWE above); and partial evaluations sho w the impact of specific social integration programmes on improving the quality of life of beneficiaries far removed from the labour market (see Miriam and PSA above): but these impact assessments are not generally carried out for all the integration effor ts of PCSWs. Impact assessments are hampered by the fact that the competencies with regard to granting and funding integration income and integration measures, as well in the labour market as in the society, are scattered between the local, regional and fe deral levels  The evaluation study on the implementation of the PIIS (Albertijn et al ., 2021b) indicates that PCSWs have no culture of evaluation. Assessment of the programmes is limited to inputs (personnel and financial means) and outputs (results in ter ms of number of participants and subsidies received), but that there is no assessment of the impact of the programme for either integration income beneficiaries or for society as a whole, or of the causal relation with the programme. The study proposes a s et of impact indicators to measure the effects of the PIIS.    Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  21  6 