Summary  The Belgian minimum income scheme, called (social) integration income, is properly embedded within the social welfare system. Based on the law on the right to social integration, it provides people in need with a rights -based, means -tested income of last resort. Different amounts of integration income exist for single people, people with dependent families, and people who co -habit. The nu mber of recipients has increased by around 3.4% per year on average during the last decade; during the COVID -19 crisis, the number of recipients of integration income increased by 7.8%. The average duration of benefit dependency is 11 months; young people and non -EU migrants, in particular, find it difficult to exit the system.  The law defines the scheme’s eligibility conditions, which are based on: nationality and residence; age; lack of financial resources; willingness to work; and enforcement of other s ocial rights. A social investigation is carried out by a social worker from a public centre for social work (PCSW) to check the eligibility of claimants. There are detailed rules on the income and assets taken into account to determine the level of integra tion income. Poverty organisations contest the definition of ‘household’ for determining co -habitant status.  Coverage is quasi -universal: only refugees and undocumented people do not qualify for the scheme. In practice, there are a number of eligibility ru les that exclude people from the right to social integration. Young people under 18 are excluded, and for homeless people access is difficult due to administrative requirements. Non -take -up (NTU) of rights is estimated at 57 -76%. Research shows that NTU oc curs where integration income is delivered as additional income, to top up wages or social benefits below the qualifying threshold. But other research indicates that NTU mostly hits the most vulnerable groups. Reducing NTU is a priority for the government.  A new research project, which is in the process of finalisation , will bring more clarity on the size and the reasons for NTU, and possible solutions.  Notwithstanding recent increases in the levels of social integration benefits, on top of the indexation and the regular welfare adaptations foreseen by law  and negotiated by the social partners , they remain beneath poverty benchmarks, such as the AROP threshold and reference budgets  which are already  sometimes  used as references on a voluntary basis at local  level . Recipients of integration income have access to additional benefits and services. Most of these benefits are based on clear eligibility rules, and the amounts are based on law. But PCSWs have wide discretion to provide social assistance through fin ancial support, support for housing, energy, medical costs, and education etc. The roll -out of REMI, an online tool based on reference budgets for a decent income, should bring more standardisation and equity in the granting of social assistance. Extra chi ld allowances do not cover the cost of children. Only certain households who can access social housing can cover the costs needed to live in dignity and participate in society.  But it needs to be mentioned that long waiting lists exist for social housing, up to 7 -8 years  Regarding active inclusion, individual plans for social integration, covering around half of integration income recipients, agreed between PCSWs and clients, serves to determine their needs and capacities to reintegrate into the labour mark et and into society. It is compulsory for young beneficiaries of integration income and for new claimants. For young people it is used as a way to support their education. Although individualised plans for social integration are seen as instruments to supp ort all aspects of integration, socio -professional orientation is dominant in the approach. Active labour market policies through employment programmes and training can be organised by the PCSW or with third parties. To stimulate participation in the labou r market, part of the income gained through the programmes is exempt from means -testing. Public employment services have developed special services for people who are remote from the labour market (including temporary work experience, work -welfare coaching , and neighbourhood work). Occasionally, schemes for social Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  integration (such as the ‘Miriam’ project for single mothers) are developed by PCSWs for beneficiaries who do not (yet) qualify for labour market integration. Although sanctions for not fulfilling  the contractual obligations of individual social integration plan s (PIIS) are rare, poverty organisations consider them to be too much control -oriented and not conceived as a real tool to promote professional and social integration. Distinct from this contractualised approach through the PIIS, the measure on social activa tion and participation allows the PSWC’s to focus on inclusion in society for those furthest from the labour market.  Social workers stress the importance and utility of this non contractualised approach.  The integration income scheme is established at fed eral level but governed locally by the PCSWs, which are responsible for the implementation of the scheme, the benefits and the integration measures. Their autonomy is advantageous when it comes to providing support based on an assessment of clients’  needs,  but their discretionary power causes wide differences in treatment.  Because  competences are divided between the federal, regional and local levels, comprehensive monitoring of integration efforts proves extremely difficult. Co -ordination between the fede ral level (in charge of funding the benefits  and some additional support measures as for example energy or mental support for young people between 18 and 25 years ) and the regional organisations (in charge of providing active labour market policies and soc ial services) could be significantly improved. The real impact of integration efforts for beneficiaries of integration income is difficult to assess. Assessment of most programmes is limited to inputs (personnel and financial means) and outputs (results in  terms of number of participants and subsidies received); but – except for certain specific integration measures – there is no assessment of the impact of the programmes on either integration income beneficiaries or society as a whole.  The following secti ons, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration  with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact  on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  Annex 4 outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates th e groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 