Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  People facing structural problems in paying off their debts  within a reasonable time can apply for collective debt mediation. An official mediator is appointed by the court to reach an amicable or ju dicial settlement, involving a remission, amortisation or reduction of the debt. People living on integration income who have problems in paying for the maintenance of their children can receive support from their PCSW (maximum 50% of amounts due per month , with a maximum of €91.66 per month).  A study (Frederickx et al ., 2021) has calculated that households living on integration income who are well informed about all their social rights (with the exception of social housing and housing benefits) and have ac cess to several social institutions and organisations that are responsible for granting these rights, can save between €108 and €214 per month. However, this is only theoretical, since many beneficiaries of integration income are not well informed about th eir rights, rights are mostly not granted automatically, and PCSWs and other social institutions and organisations often do not use ‘social rights exploring guides’ that provide a list of social rights that could possibly be granted.  2 Links with labour mark et activation  One of the conditions for being able to claim the right to social integration is that claimants must demonstrate their willingness to work, unless this is impossible for health or equity reasons. Although the legal framework allows for a stri ct interpretation, the concept of willingness to work refers to a frame of mind which is different from that in respect of unemployment benefit, and which allows for the proof of job -search required to be less stringent. It indicates that applicants should  not resign themselves to their fate, but should actively try to improve their situation. In practice, the minimum requirement is registration with the public employment services (PES). In any event, the condition should be interpreted as an ‘effort commit ment’ rather than a ‘result commitment’ on the part of the applicant. The assessment is made by PCSWs, not the PES.  Since 2016, the individual social integration plan ( geïndividualiseerd project voor sociale integratie  / projet individualisé d’intégration sociale  – PIIS )29 has become the main tool for PCSWs to assess the needs and capacities of integration income beneficiaries. The aim of the PIIS is to support the employment  and social integration of integration income beneficiaries, but also to hold them to account for  their own efforts towards integration. The contract is compulsory (unless there are health or fairness reasons) for people  under 25. For people aged  25 and over, the PIIS is compulsory for new applications or if the y have not claimed the rig ht to social integration in the previous three months. It is always possible to draw up an optional PIIS. PIIS s cover different aspect s of reintegration  – in professional life as well as in society. A distinction is made between the specific PIIS for students to complete their education, and the general PIIS for all other actions to improve integration, especially into the labour market. Under COVID -19, instructions were given to PCSWs by the Federal Service for Social Integration to be flexible in the conclusion of PIIS s with regard to timing, content and obligations , including taking into account the situation regarding health, childcare, access to internet etc30. Number and profile of PIIS participa nts31 In 2020, the number of PIISs concluded among integration income beneficiaries was 106,252 (47% of the total). In 2019, there were 112,400 PIISs (50.56%) out of a total of 222,290 beneficiaries; in 2018, 114,471 out of 219,932 (52%). The  29 Geïndividualiseerd project voor maatschappelijke integratie (GPMI) | POD Maatscha ppelijke Integratie (mi -is.be)  30 210720 -overzicht -covid -19-NL.pdf (armoedebestrijding.be)  31 Focus 23  – Het geïndividualiseerd project voor maatschappelijke integratie (GPMI) | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie (mi -is.be) ; https://stat.mi -is.be/nl/form/export/comparedashboardbis  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  percentage of recip ients of integration income with PIISs changed markedly after the reforms in 2016. Before, only those aged under 25 were obliged ; after 2016, all new recipients of integration income fell under the obligations to conclude a PIIS. In October 2020, 55.6% of recipients had no PIIS. 3.8% were exempt for health or equity reasons. 14.2% fell under the arrangements for students; and 26.4% concluded a general PIIS. In 2020, of all PIIS beneficiaries, 49.6% were aged under 25, 23.3%, 25 -34, 19.3%, 35 -49, 7.4%, 50 -64, and 0.4% over 65. 50.7% were men and 49.3% women. 30.4% were non -EU migrants, 7.2% EU migrants, and 62.4% of Belgian nationality.  Integration income recipients who have concluded a PIIS with the PCSW get an individual assessment and an individual action  plan that is developed by the social workers with the beneficiary, with the aim of designing a personal development path to increase their self -reliance. For young people under 25, the main objective is to support their (secondary and tertiary) education.  For people not yet ready to integrate into the labour market, because of complex personal situations (drug addiction, homelessness, mental health, etc.), the PIIS can include measures to remedy these problems. All PIIS contracts are evaluated at least thr ee times per year.  All PIIS contracts are concluded within three months after the approval to grant minimum income benefits.  If anyone  breaches, without valid reason, the PIIS that they have  signed, the payment of their  integration income can, after formal  notice, be wholly or partially suspended for one month (three months in case s of a second violation within one year). Sanctions are rare : in only 3% of cases  are beneficiaries subject to temporary suspension ( one  month) for not complying  with  the PIIS. Ho wever, an evaluation study of the PIIS organised by the BAPN32 has show n that their members consider the PIIS to be too much control -oriented and insufficiently conceived as a real accompaniment of integration income beneficiaries toward reintegration in to the labour market and into society. The BAPN has asked for a complete review of the practice s surrounding  the PIIS , and urged  a more flexible interpretation of equity reasons that exempt  people from active ly search ing for work.  A PIIS platform of poverty organisations, social organisations, trade unions and professional organisations of social workers, has joined force s to demand the abolition of the PIIS and its replacement by true accompaniment of integration income beneficiaries33. PCSWs can play an important role in providing tailored and comprehensive services aimed at effectively addressing the multifaceted causes of poverty and social exclusion. Employment programmes that ease the transition to employment are part of this strateg y. Under Art. 60, § 7 and 61 of the law on PCSWs, centres can themselves act as employers or mediate with a third party to hire the beneficiary. These initiatives are aimed at reintegrating excluded people into the labour market and restoring their social security rights. Nevertheless, the problem with these measures is that the subsidy expires as soon as people’s eligibility for unemployment benefits is restored, which – previously, when the measure  was still under national competence  – result ed in a large  proportion of the beneficiaries falling back into unemployment at that moment. That is why the Flemish government , and especially the VDAB , has reframed the measure under  temporary work experience (see below). PCSWs can also agree on vocational training o r initial training pathways, which it may provide, if necessary, through third parties.  In 2017 a partnership agreement was concluded between the Flemish Association of Municipalities (VVSG) and the VDAB, to exchange knowledge and to organise better co-ope ration. Yearly action plans and provincial consultation platforms make this co - 32 bpn -001 -20-rapport -gpmiv3 -1.pdf (bapn.be)  33 Nee,  sancties motiveren niet om sneller aan het werk te gaan  – De Standaard  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  15  operation concrete. PCSWs remain the case -managers for beneficiaries of integration income, but share certain tools with the PES (access to PES files of job -seekers who are inte gration income beneficiaries, and exchange of information and tools on temporary work experiences). The Walloon PES (FOREM) also concluded a co -operation agreement with the federation of PCSWs to improve the reception and guidance of beneficiaries of integ ration income with a view to their reintegration (first concluded in 2005, latest agreement from 2016). The aim is to exchange good practice and methods to improve the professional reintegration of beneficiaries.  The regional PES (VDAB, FOREM and ACTIRIS34) offer several services for the reintegration of people who are very remote from the labour market, including beneficiaries of the integration income (e.g. intensive mediation, on -the-job training, activating care, temporary work experience, and community  work). The services and measures offered do not make a distinction based on income status but on assessment of needs. For beneficiaries who were referred to the PES, in most cases no separate data on participation of integration income beneficiaries in ac tive labour market policies (ALMPs) are collected to distinguish them from other participants. For beneficiaries of integration income, a special programme called ‘temporary work experience’ ( tijdelijke werkervaring – TWE ) has been developed by VDAB35: und er this, for a maximum of two years, professional training and apprenticeships are organised to provide the necessary work experience to people who are out of work for a long time. The programme integrates the previous Art. 60§7 temporary employment scheme  and is implemented through co -operation agreements with several partner organisations, non -profit as well as profit -making. The TWE trajectory goes beyond the period of employment that gives participants access to unemployment benefits, and also includes further labour market integration measures such as apprenticeships and on -the-job-training. PCSWs pay VDAB for the whole trajectory, even after the integration income beneficiaries become entitled to unemployment benefits. 286 out of 300 Flemish PCSWs part icipate in the programme, but the implementation rate of the measure is very different between PCSWs: the proportion of integration income beneficiaries participating in TWE, in the main cities in Flanders that host most beneficiaries of integration income , varies between 6.44% and 42.69%; on average 21.78% of integration income beneficiaries in all municipalities participate in TWE. Evaluation shows that the number of TWE programmes is increasing, but faces a temporary dip due to COVID -19. Most participant s have a migration background or are low-skilled beneficiaries of integration income. The outflow into work is quite high: 39% of participants are at work three months after ending the programme, and 69% of these still have a job one year later36. VDAB eva luates the measure as very promising, although implementation could still be improved by increasing the number of municipalities that participate in the measure and by making them more familiar with the possibilities of temporary employment.  For people li ving in poverty with complex problems in different areas of life, work -welfare coaching is offered both individually and in groups, accompanied by experienced experts in poverty (no data are available on the number of beneficiaries of integration income). In addition, municipalities, NGOs, educational institutes, and agriculture/horticulture businesses can employ so -called neighbourhood workers: unemployed people (including beneficiaries of integration income) who are not fit for (at least 50%) work in the labour market can do small chores to improve their skills.  Beneficiaries of integration income who start to work ,engage in professional training  or an education , can receive partial benefits to top up their income from work training   34 Brussels region.  35 https://extranet.vdab.be/themas/twe -ocmw  36 De Pauw, S. et al ., Analyse operationele en strategische werking van de activerende maatregel TWE -OCMW 202 1. De Pauw et al., Verhouding personen met RMI en LL t.o.v. TWE -OCMW, 2020.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  16  or scholarship. . This  system is called ‘the socio -professional integration exemption’. When an integration income recipient starts working or receives professional training lasting  a maximum of three years , a socio -professional integration ( Socio -professionele integratie  / intégration socio -professionelle – ISP) exemption is applied for up to six  years, which  is deduc ted from the net  income gained through the activity. The general ISP (1  September 2021) is €258.98  per month . For students with a scholarship the ISP is €72.23 per  month37. For people with irregular artistic activities, an amount of €3,107.53 is exempted from the means of subsistence that are taken into account for the calculation of the minimum income  benefit. The ISP is also applied when the beneficiary of integration income was participating in training before receiving benefits and for training allowances paid by the regional PES or by the federal employment services ( Rijksdienst voor Arbeidsvoorzie ningen – RVA , and  Office National de l ’Emploi – ONEM ) in cases of individual professional training or apprenticeships. The BAPN has called for the time limit of three  years for the general ISP to  be abolished and for  the same rules to apply to people who w ere already working before applying for integration income.  In cases where minimum income is used to complement employment  income (for people at work who have an income from work that is too low to live o n), a lump -sum exemption is applied: €155/year for c o-habit ing people , €250 for single people  and €310 for people with depend ants (amounts valid from 1  September 2017)38. These amounts are deducted from the income from work after all other means of subsistence have been take into account for calculating  the integration  income benefit.  An evaluation study (Albertijn et al ., 2021) has show n that , in 60% of cases, there is a positive  outcome to PIISs;  but success depends on the objectives that are agreed in the PIIS. There is a great variety in the way PIISs are implemented by PCSWs: practices differ considerably according to size of PCSWs, the attitude and workload of social workers, the policy choices of board me mbers, and so on. There are two contrasting approaches: some PCSWs see PIISs as a very time -consuming administrative burden with no real added value, whilst other PCSWs see it in theory as a good instrument to support the personal accompaniment of integrat ion income beneficiaries. Data from the Federal Public Service for Social Integration (2017) show that 21.3% of beneficiaries with a PIIS are at work after one  year, compared with  18.4% of beneficiaries without a PIIS39. The evaluation of the co -operation agreement between the Walloon PES (FOREM) and the federation of PCSWs has shown that reintegration of beneficiaries of integration income in to the labour market was successful for 44% of them after six months and for 54% after one  year40. For  participants in the temporary work experience offered by VDAB, 68% of participants were working as employees  on year later, and  2.3% were  self-employed41.     37 Bedragen | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie (mi -is.be)   38 Berekening van de bestaansmiddelen | Primabook (mi -is.be)  39 Focus 23  – Het geïndividualiseerd project voor maatschappelijke integratie (GPMI) | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie (mi -is.be) ; 40 Nouvelle convention cadre de partenariat entre la Wallonie, le Forem et les CPAS  – Emploi et Formation professionnelle en Wallonie  41Jaarverslag -2020.pdf (vdab.be)   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  17  3 