Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  In terms of institutional design, the Belgian minimum income schemes are properly framed and embedded in the welfare system. The minimum incom e benefit in Belgium, called integration income ( revenu d’intégration  / leefloon ) forms part of the right to social integration ( droit à l’intégration sociale  / recht op maatschappelijke integratie ), established by law1. The right to social integration is  a legal right that can  1 Act of 26 May 2002 on the right to social integration ( Loi concernant le droit à l'intégration sociale / Wet betreffende het recht op maatschappelijke integratie ). Royal Decree of 11 July 2002 on the general regulation regarding the right to social integration ( Arrêté royal portant règlement général en matière de droit à l'intégration sociale / Koninklijk besluit houdende het algemeen re glement betreffende het recht op maatschappelijk integratie ). Wet van 26 mei 2002 betreffende het Recht op Maatschappeli jke Integratie  – bijwerking 1 maart 2020 | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie (mi -is.be) ; Koninklijk Besluit houdende het Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  be effectively claimed. Integration income is a means -tested scheme of income support of last resort that provides cash social assistance to individuals and households in need. It covers the difference between claimants’ assessed in come and the level of the guaranteed income support. All means of subsistence are taken into account, including those of co -habit ing spouse s or partners, and possibly also those of co-habit ing parents and  children.  The PCSW has the discretionary power to a ssess the appropriateness of this for reasons of fairness, e.g. in case of troubled family relations .   The law covers all aspects from eligibility conditions to governance arrangements. Eligibility conditions relate to : age ; nationality ; residence ; lack of financial resources ; willingness to work ; and enforcement of other social rights. Conditionality rules, and the sanctions and exclusions attached to the right to social integration , are strictly regulated by law.  The benefit is establis hed at federal level but granted locally by the public centre for social work (PCSW)  (Centre public d'action sociale  – CPAS  / Openbaar Centrum voor Maatschappelijk Welzijn  – OCMW ). Since 2016, for most beneficiaries of integration income, there has been th e formal possibility of concluding an individual plan for social integration, though, in practice, only around half have done so.  1.1  Eligibility  The law on social integration imposes six conditions for obtaining the ‘right to social integration’ (the combina tion of access to the integration benefit, access to employment, and the conclusion of an individualised plan for social integration):  1. being resident  in Belgium;  2. being age d 18 or over, or a minor emancipated by marriage; for a minor who is pregnant  or looking after children, there is no age limit;  3. possessing Belgian nationality , or being either a European citizen, a foreigner listed in the national register, a recognised refugee, or stateless;  4. having insufficient resources;   5. being willing to work , unless prevented by health or reasons  of fairness2; and  6. having exhausted rights to any other (social) benefits (both Belgian and foreign social rights).  With regard to residence and nationality , integration income may be claimed by: nationals; stateless people authorised to reside; recognised refugees; beneficiaries of subsidiary protection; foreign nationals listed on the national register of natural persons; and EU citizens (or members of their family accompanying or joining them) with the right of residence of more than three months. People in the last category acquire the right to social integration only after the first three months of residence: claimants must have their habitual and effective residence in Belgium and be authorised to reside there with dispensation for a maximum of four weeks per year abroad.  In order to access integration income, claimants must be considered ‘in need’. They are considered to be in need if, following a social investigation and an investigation of mea ns, their resources appear to be lower than the amounts of integration income available (calculated according to the different categories of beneficiary).  The  social investigation and investigation of means must be carried out by a  PCSW social worker. This  is stipulated by law and the social worker has an obligation of confidentiality towards the claimant . Claimant s have the right to be consulted prior to the decision. The social assistance council of the PCSW must take a decision within 30  algemeen re glement betreffende het recht op maatschappelijke integratie van 11 juli 2002  – bijwerking 1 juni 2017 | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie (mi -is.be) . 2 For example a young person  who is studying. The PCSW makes and autonomous assessment of reasons of fairne ss, based on the personal situation of the claimant.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  days following t he claim. The right is acknowledged from the date of the claim. The first payment must take place within 15 days following the decision. Anyone who applie s for integration income can appeal against a negative decision of the PCSW within three  months of bei ng notified of it,  or if the PCSW does not take a decision on the application  within 30 days . The appeal is made  to the labour court for claimants’ place of residence. Integration income beneficiaries can request a hearing at the special social service committee ( Bijzonder Comité Sociale Dienst ) of the PCSW when they want to contest certain decisions of the PCSW. They can be assisted by a third person of their choice3.There is no specific limit on the duration of integration  income , but the right to social integration  is reasse sed  at least every year.  Income and assets taken into account  Income taken into account includes all resources, salaries, and annual net income actually available to the claimant of whatever nature or origin, including all allo wances paid under Belgian or foreign social legislation, unless there is a regulatory exception.  Property and other assets are also taken into account , not as a basis for excluding possible beneficiaries, but for calculating the amount of integration inco me payable. Real estate income is taken into account when the applicant is the owner or beneficial owner of the property. The income is taken into account for both buildings4 and land which has not been built on5. In case s where real property  is transfer red (when transferred for remuneration or free takes place in the 10 years preceding the claim):  the market value minus  the debt  of the claimant6. Mortgage interest is deducted when calculating property income, provided that: the mortgage debt was contra cted for the claimant's own needs; the claimant proves the destination of the capital loaned; the claimant proves that the mortgage interest was due and has actually been paid for the year preceding that in which the decision was made.  Exempt income and as sets  The following income sources in particular are not taken into consideration:   social assistance provided by PCSWs;   family benefits and scholarships;   alimony or advances on maintenance payments;   regional bonuses and allowances (subsidies in case of relocation or for installation, rent allowance);   refundable tax credits;   care budgets for people with disabilities, elderly people requiring care, or severely dependent people;   compensation for acting as a volunteer;   monthly allowances paid as part of the transition periods for unemployment, or productivity bonus in the event of training (maximum six months); and   non -regular donations from any institution or people not subject to a maintenance obligation.   3 Wegwijs in het beroep tegen een OCMW -beslissing | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie ( mi-is.be)  4 The amount of non -exempted cadastral income x 3 (exemption of €750 + €125 per child for whom child benefit is drawn).  5 The amount of non -exempted cadastral income x 3 (exemption of €30).  6 At the rate of 6% of the amount between €6,200 and €12 ,500 and at the rate of 10% beyond this amount.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  Applicants may be required to assert their rights ag ainst people who owe them maintenance , these being limited to: spouses, former spouses, (adoptive)parents and (adopted) children,  Number per year and profile of recipients7 Year  Total  Men  Woman  2017  201,855  97,735  104,120  2018  206,218  99,935  106,283  2019  208,476  99,818  108,658  2020  212,722  101,362  111,360  A special enquiry carried out by the Federal Public Service for Social Integration , along  with PCSWs , show ed that during 2020 (January 2020 to January 2021), the number of integration income recipients during the COVID -19 crisis increased by  7.8% compared with  an average of 3.4% over  the previous decade8.  The median  duration of benefit receipt (in months of be nefit receipt between two  periods of interruption of benefit receipt of at least three  months) increased from six months in 2000 to 11 months in 2018, with a significant increase in 2015, due to reform of the unemployment benefit system for young people. Women remain on average one  to two  months longer in the system than men. There is a decreasing trend among  older age categories and a strong increase for younger age groups. The longest duration is for the youngest age group ( under 25: 17 months, mostly students), and  non -EU migrants (24 months, especially for refugees)9. These are  logical consequence s as  for students the duration of  study is often over a specific  number of years and refugees need to learn the language first.  However, once transited fro m minimum income into employment, people of foreign descent keep their jobs longer than native Belgians.  Expenditure: federal subsidy in support of the right to social integration income  Year  Budgetary statistics FPSSP * Actual disbursements FPSSI**  2019  €1,165,799,000  €1,027,423,172.31  2020  €1,268,403,000  €1,102,629,559.45  2021  €1,343,927,000   *FPSSP: Federal Public Service for Social Protection .  **FPSSI: Federal Public Service for Social Integration . Assessment of eligibility criteria and conditionality.   7 Total number of claimants per annum.  As the average duration is lower than 1 year, the monthly averages are lower. This figure amounts to roughly 18,5 claimants per 1.000 inhabitants.   8 monitoring_covid_20211020_nl.pdf (belgium.be)  9 POD MI -IS, Duration of minimum income trajectories, Focus No 26, March 2020, Focusnota 26  – Duur van de leefloontrajecten | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie (mi -is.be) .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  The Belgian Network of Organisations Against Poverty (BAPN) has listed several problems in relation to the eligibility criteria and the conditions for receiving integration income benefits (BAPN, 2021 ). Regarding means -testing , it points to the fact that, according to case law, people may only be qualified as co -habiting when they not only live under the same roof, but also share household duties. PCSWs often only look to the fact that there is an econ omic and financial advantage when living under the same roof. This practice strongly limits the possibilities for co -housing and possible solutions for homeless people. The practice in certain PCSWs of launching investigations into integration income benef iciaries who have a (shared) property  (in the case of non -EU citizens by contracting private detectives) is unlawful , because only a social worker is legally entitled to do an social inquiry.  Regarding residence , there are still important problems in rel ation to the reference address that homeless people can use to apply to PCSWs: many PCSWs request proof of removal from the population register of the previous municipality of residence, which puts homeless people in a grey zone with regard to access to in tegration income and other social services. Given the fact that at -risk -of-poverty (AROP) rates are higher for young people (aged 16 -29) than for older people (30 -64), the exclusion of young people under 18 not covered by one of the exceptional reasons is seen as unjust. They can only receive individual social support on a discretionary basis by the PCSW and not linked to legal age requirements. For young people in problematic home situations, this seriously limits their ability to start an independent life .   1.2  Coverage  In terms of coverage, the right to social integration is quasi -universal. The only legal exceptions relate to asylum -seekers (who receive in -kind support) and undocumented migrants (who are only entitled to urgent medical care and education fo r their children). Nevertheless, this quasi -universal coverage is rather theoretical. On the basis of EU -SILC10 data, non -take -up (NTU) in Belgium has been calculated at 57 -76%. According to research (Bouckaert and Schokkaert, 2011), this high rate can be largely explained by the discrepancy between the NTU rate of those who are entitled to an entire integration income (where NTU is 40%) and beneficiaries for whom the integration income is only a supplementary income source (varying rates for different scen arios). Estimates by Groenez and Nicaise (2002) suggest that the risk of NTU is highest among the most vulnerable categories (single parents, the low educated, and migrants). But NTU is also a problem in the case of low -paid workers, for whom integration i ncome could function as a top -up to their wages. Obstacles include ignorance, psychological barriers (such as shame or fear of being stigmatised), and institutional factors (e.g. sanctions or suspensions in respect of mainstream social security, or complex ity of regulations), but also barriers in the implementation of the scheme (e.g. additional conditions imposed by social services) (Schepers and Nicaise, 2015). A MISSION (mobile integrated social services employment outcomes for people in need) project of  the city of Kortrijk, the Flemish public employment service (VDAB) and the Agency for Children and Families, in co -operation with several universities and colleges (implemented from 2016 to 2019) has shown that only 23% of households with young children d id not take up their right to integration income. The problem was more in their knowledge about additional social support they could have access to.  The new federal government intends to increase the number of social rights that are granted automatically. This is particularly important with regard to derived rights of people who are beneficiaries of integration income. To reach this objective, organisa tions in charge of social benefits will be able to access the Crossroads Bank  10 European Union statistics on incom e and living conditions . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  for Social Security. Where automatic granting of rights is not possible, a digital tool will be developed to facilitate identification of social rights by social workers.  For th e moment, no detailed data are available on NTU rates and the income groups and profiles of people who do not take up the benefits they are entitled to.  A long -term research project is currently investigating take -up problems in Belgium. The TAKE project i s a network research project between the Centre for Social Policy (University of Antwerp), the Belgian Federal Planning Bureau, the Federal Public Service Social Security , and the Universit y of  Liège. The main objective of the project is to investigate NTU  across Belgian public policy provisions. It is  aim ed at  mak ing progress on all three dimensions on which we lack evidence: how big is the problem, how can it be explained, and how should policy be (re)designed in order to maximi se take -up? In addition, th e aim is to  examin e the consequences of NTU in terms of budgetary impact and equity , and to identify best practice in monitoring NTU by public administrati ve bodies . The benefits covered by  the project are social assistance benefits: the income -replacing a nd integration benefit for people with disabilit ies, support allowance and income guarantee for older people , the integration income, the reinforced reimbursement of health costs , and the heating benefit. The TAKE_ISSOC dataset compares the rules in place on means -testing, the eligibility criteria , and the benefits. A survey of beneficiaries will investigate the importance of and reasons for NTU ; and  the effect of different ways of  means -testing will be tested  through a micro -simulation model. The r esults are expected by the end of this year11. Another research project financed by the Belgian Scientific Policy Public Service is the TRAHOME project.  This project aims at investigatin g the N TU by homeless people.  The project runs for four years, results are expected by  March 2024.  1.3  Adequacy  Someone is considered to be in need if, following the social investigation and the examination of their resources, these appear to be lower than t he amounts of integration income, which differ according to the three existing household types. Claimants’ resources are deducted from the integration income amount. The amounts of the integration income are set out in the legislation and linked to the con sumer price index  and thus automatically adjusted to cover the rise in the cost of living .  Gross monthly amounts, not subject to taxation ( March 2022 ):  Co-habiting person: € 729,20   Single person: € 1.093,80   Person living together with a dependent family: € 1.478,22  These amounts may be combined with family benefits received for children and also with a limited amount of income from labour.  This non deducted labour income amounts to maximum €269,43  per month, or in the case of income from artistic activities €3.233,17  per annum.  The amounts can also be combined with other social rights such as the heating allowance for heating oil of €210  per annum.  The dependent family rate is granted when there is at least one minor child in the household. Each spouse is paid half in their own right. However, for couples without children, there is no individual right to integration income.  In the event of co -habitation, the resources of the spouse or life partner must be taken into account when calculating the integration income. The resources of immediate ancestors and adult descendants may be taken into account partially, totally or not at all, based on reasons of fairness (for example high levels of debt in the household, medical costs, school bills, moving costs, costs for divorce or in case of  11 TAKE | Reducing Poverty Through Improving Take Up Of Social Policies (wordpress.com)  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  a total rupture in contact between the family members, this in order  to avoid a further escalation of the existing conflict ).It is up to the PCSW to decide, after a social investigation of the situation of the household, whether the resources of co -habiting people are taken into account. Examples of these fairness reasons and of the calculation of the integration income for those co -habiting can be found in the PCSW toolbox12.The resources of co -habiting persons, other than parent s or children are not taken into account.  Payment is granted for an indefinite period without time limits as long as the entitlement conditions are fulfilled, with a mandatory annual revision. The amount of the integration income is reviewed when the means  of subsistence of beneficiaries (or people living with them) change.  An automatic readjustment of 2% of the allowance is made  when the consumer price index varies by 2% in relation to the previous pivot index. Adjustment s are done through royal decree s. Social minima (including integration income) also increase through the allocation of the ‘welfare envelope ’. The latter is a structural mechanism that was established by law (2005) with the objective of increasing the level  of benefits by more than  the index , and thus progressively lifting beneficiaries above the AROP threshold. The joint – National Labour Council (CNT/NAR) and Central Economic Council (CCE/CRB) – committee of social partners gives its opinion to the federal  government on the allocation of this ‘envelope ’, which is calculated every two years by the Federal Planning Bureau. The law envisages  a minimum yearly increase of 1% for social minima and flat -rate benefits.  During the COVID -19 crisis, from 1 July 2020 until 30 September 2021, an extra monthly benefit of €50 was granted to all beneficiaries of social assistance benefits – the integration income, the guaranteed income for older people, and the income -replacing benefit for people with disabilities. Between  1 October and 31 December 2021 this extra benefit was reduced to €25.  Although the level of the benefits is not based on the AROP  threshold  (60% of equivalised median income), the adequacy of the integration income is mostly assessed against it. This is t rue not just for  civil society organisations and trade unions advocating for decent minimum income , but for the federal government itself, which  included in the federal government agreement of September 202013 the objective of bringing the integration inco me level closer to the AROP threshold. In November 2020, the federal government decided to increase certain social minima14, including the integration income, by10.75%, on top of the index, over  a period of four years (2021 -2024)15.  However, notwithstanding the phased increases, all social assistance benefits will remain well below the AROP threshold, even after 202416. Although the social package was welcomed as a significant improvement in minimum benefits, critical comments were made17 abou t the allocation of the budget. A 10.75% increase in social  12 Berekening van de bestaansmiddelen | Primabook (mi -is.be) ; Koninklijk Besluit houdende het algemeen reglement betreffende het recht op maatschappelijke integratie van 11 juli 2002  – bijwerking 1 juni 2017 | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie (mi -is.be) ; Algemene omzendbrief betreffende de wet van 26 mei 2002 betreffende het recht op maatschappelijke integratie | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie ( mi-is.be)  13 Regeerakkoord_2020.pdf (belgium.be)  14 Social minima: minimum benefits in social assistance (guaranteed income for older people, income -replacement allowance for p eople with disabilities, integration income), minimum benefits in income -replacing branches of social security (unemployment, pensions, invalidity).  15 Chamber of Representatives, Policy Declaration by the Minister for Social Affairs (in Dutch and French), DOC 55 1610/003, 2 November 2020.  16 For figures comparing minimum benefits with the AROP threshold (2021 and 2024), see Annex 3.  17 Decenniumdoelen, Letter to the Prime Minister, Raising the social minima up to the poverty threshold  (in Dutch), 17  November 2020. Press release ABVV, ACLVB and ACV, Adaptations to prosperity and Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  assistance benefits, compared with only 4.5% for social minima in the unemployment system, means that social assistance levels exceed the level of minimum unemployment benefits (for heads of famil ies and for young unemployed  people ). Also, by giving the same percentage increases to beneficiaries, irrespective of their status, the allocation also fails to take into account higher levels of need among heads of family or single parents than co -habitan ts, where the household has other income sources (Van Lancker, 2021).  Another benchmark to assess adequacy of income is the use of reference budgets , developed on the basis of a scientific, theoretical and methodological framework, that provide an answer t o the question how much a household needs in order to fully participate in society. Recent research (Frederickx, Penne, Delanghe and Storms, 2021), uses the EUROMOD microsimulation method to measure the ability of minimum income schemes, including integrat ion income, combined with other sources of income, to ensure a decent standard of living, measured through reference budgets for different household types. Net disposable income is obtained by adding child allowances, social security contributions and taxe s to people’s gross minimum income. The study demonstrates that net disposable income from integration income is insufficient to live a decent life for households who rent a house in the private sector, measured by means of reference budgets for different household types. For some household types the gap is considerable. For single people, the net disposable income represents only 73% of the reference budget level.  Some PSWC’s already use the reference budget tool as a way of not only raising the income of minimum income beneficiaries, but also as a tool for accompanying beneficiaries and for their social activation, but also in order to provide for guidance on the take up of social rights.  Child allowances  are an important source of additional income for ho useholds with children in a vulnerable situation. Regional governments provide social supplements to the basic amounts in the form of child allowances, but research shows that these extra allowances do not cover the costs of children in financially vulnera ble families18. Only where households can access social housing does the net disposable income of single people, single people with young children, couples, and couples with young children living on an integration income reach the level of the reference bu dget for the respective household types. For couples with children of primary or secondary school age who are living on the integration income, even this is not sufficient (Frederickx et al., 2021 – see figure in Annex 1).  The shortfall in income for single people, and couples with and without children, living on integration income. Difference between net disposable income and reference budgets for different household types .   improvement of social benefits  (in Dutch), 16  September 2020. Serroyen, C., Increased social minima, but a number of people are still under the poverty threshol d (in Dutch) in Vakbeweging 933, 25 November 2020.  18 The CEBUD study (Frederickx et al .) calculates that child allowances and tax advantages for single parents living on integration income are not sufficient to cover the extra expenses they have (based on reference budgets for different types of households) for children, calculated for different age groups (see p.9, Table 1)  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10   Source: Graph taken from  Frederickx et al ., Annex 1 p.16 . Red bar  = single person; blue bar  = couple .  Comparison of integration income with other benchmarks (€ monthly amounts, 2021)19  Name  Single  Single  +1 child  Single  + 2 children  Couple  Couple  +1 child  Couple  +2 children  Integration income  1,024.49  1,384.54  1,384.54  1,365.98  1,384.54  1,384.54  GMMI  1,658.23  1,658.23  1,658.23  1,658.23  1,658.23  1,658.23  AROP 60% (2020)  1,284  1,669  2,054  1,925  2,310  2,696  AROP 40% (2020)  856  923  1,369  1,283  1,540  1,797  Source : FPS SP, FPS SI, National Labour Council . Note: GMMI = guaranteed minimum wage.  A study by the FPSSP , at the request of the Court of Auditors, calculate d the budgetary impact of several pending legislative proposals to lift all social minimum benefits above the AROP threshold  (FPSS P, 2020). The FPSS P limited its research to the cost of lifting social assistance benefits above the threshold, arguing that people who receive social security benefits below the new social assistance levels will be eligible for complementary social assistance benefits to top u p their income. The study state d that since 2012, levels of social minima have only remained on a par with the AROP threshold, with no real progress regarding the number of people living at risk of poverty or in reducing the depth of poverty. Calculations are made both with and without an increase in the number of beneficiaries, to take account of new applications by people living on other benefits below the AROP threshold. The simulations show that lifting social assistance benefits above the AROP, other t hings being equal , would  19 For a comparison of different minimum income benefits with  the  AROP 60% threshold, see Annex 2  and Annex 3. Note that, to assess ben efit amounts against AROP levels, child allowances and tax credits for children should be added to the benefits. The CEBUD calculated that for a child aged 2 -3 the average child allowance in the regions in Belgium is €143, and the tax credit is €34; for tw o children, one aged 6 -11 and the other between 12 and 17, the  child allowance is €529 and the tax credit is €78.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  cost between €717 million (21.2% of the actual expenses for social assistance) and €1,377.3 million (40.7%)20. 1.4  Links with other benefits  PCSWs have discretion to grant additional social assistance  to people in need. The right to so cial assistance consists of a wide variety of instruments to alleviate poverty and social exclusion, but the procedures to implement these instruments are not explicitly framed at the national and regional level. PCSW s can consider the integration income t o be insufficient and provide recipient s with additional financial support. The procedures are different from centre to centre, and not always standardised within centres. PCSW s can intervene in respect of  housing cost s, energy costs, medical expenses, costs related to education of children etc. In 2012, the Budget Advice and Research Cent re (CEBUD ) developed a web application tool called REMI , based on reference budgets, to assist PCSWs in the ir deliberation s about gran ting additional social assistance to beneficiaries of integration income21. The new federal government plans to promote and support the use of REMI in decisions about additional social support for families with insufficient income.  The most important benefits that beneficiaries of integration income can receive are child benefi ts, which  fall under regional competence22. On top of the basic amounts, all regions grant extra social supplements for families with low income. In Flanders (income ceiling €30,986.17) the social supplement is €51/month per child; in Wallonia (income ceil ing €31,603.68) , €56.10/month per child; in the Brussels Capital Region (income ceiling €31,620) , €40.80/month per child; in the German -speaking Community (for families who enjoy enhanced reimbursement) , €75/month. Regions also have extra supplements for l arge families and for single parents (often poor families). In Flanders , 24% of children (312,000) received the social supplement in 2020. For childcare  in Flanders and Brussels , there  exists a system of income -related childcare tariffs , where by people who  have insufficient resources to pay the contribution can enjoy reductions in tariffs through PCSW s (Flanders) or a  specialised organisation (Brussels) that provides people with a certificate to prove their income situation to the childcare facility23. Ben eficiaries of integration income who are tax -exempt receive a tax credit  for their dependent children. Amounts vary with the number of children: from €1,630 for one child to €15,250 for four children. Children with disabilities count double. When the paren t is single, an additional €1,630 is granted.  Subsidies are granted for the installation of ex-homeless people  who have found a home/room. Other housing  benefits for people with low income, who are obliged to move out of a house that is declared uninhabitable and need rent support for their new home, exist at regional level. Beneficiaries of integration income also qualify for social housing in all the reg ions. Due to the long waiting lists, in certain cases a rent subsidy is granted against  private housing market  rents . At local level, PCSWs can also grant subsidies for rent. The rent subsidy is only granted to housing beneath a maximum rent threshold , and  which  is in good condition. For beneficiaries of integration income who face difficulties in pay ing the rental deposit, PCSWs can  20 Chamber of Representatives, Budgetary impact of legislative proposals to lift social benefits above the poverty threshold (in Dutch and French), Opinion of the Court of Auditors, DOC 55 0624/002, 26 November 2020.  21 Referentiebudgetten voor een menswaa rdig inkomen, een webapplicatie | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie (mi -is.be)  22 Flanders: groeipakket (Decreet 27 April 2018); Wallonia (Décret wallon 8 February 2018) and Brussels (Ordonnance 25 April 2019): allocations familiales; German -speaking Communit y: Kindergeld (Dekret 23 April 2018).  23 OCMW -tarief kinderopvang (vvsg.be)   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  intervene by paying the deposit  directly, or by providing a bank guarantee or deposit letter24.  Since 2002, an Energy fund, financed through extra charges by consumers and managed by the Belgian Commission for Regulation of Electricity and Gas contributes to financ ing PCSWs that support integration income beneficiaries who face difficulties paying their energy bills25. Entitlem ents to a heating allowance may be granted by PCSWs  with in the framework of the Fuel Social Fund26. The allowance, of a maximum amount of between €210 and €300 per year (depending on oil price s), is provided to people  who belong to the following categories : (1) the beneficiaries of the increased reimbursement system (see below) of the sickness and invalidity insurance whose household income does not exceed the income limits for the second category below;  (2) low -income households whose annual gross taxable income does not exceed €19,566.25, increased by €3,622.24 for each dependent person; and  (3) people benefiting from a collective settlement of debts or debt mediation, whom the PCSW has established are unable to cope with their heating bills.  Access to th e social tariff for energy  is granted by the federal state. Protected clients benefit from a much lower social tariff for energy. During COVID -19 this status has been extended to all people who are beneficiaries of the ‘increased reimbursement of healthcar e costs’ (see below). Previously, this status of protected client eligible for the social tariff was only granted to people on minimum income benefits, but has now been extended to cover all households under a certain low -income threshold (€19,957.16 gross  yearly plus €3,694.61 per dependant). In light of the curre nt energy crisis, the federal government foresees an additional amount of €17 million for the energy fund.  In Flanders there is also a social tariff for water  for beneficiaries of social assistanc e, including integration income.   Regarding access to healthcare , beneficiaries of integration income receive mandatory  sickness insurance free of charge. They also enjoy increased reimbursement ( intervention majorée  / de verhoogde tegemoetkoming ) of healthcare costs: beneficiaries of social assistance benefits, including integration income, automatically enjoy a number of benefits such as reduced  out-of-pocket payment s for medical care , medicines and hospital  stays , third payer rule27 and a lower threshold for the maximum health costs bill28.  Regarding transport , all regions have a reduced tariff for the use of buses for people who are eligible for enhanced reimbursement of health costs; at national level this also covers trains. Pe ople with low income, including integration income beneficiaries, may enjoy reduced prices for holidays and trips . Beneficiaries of integration income can enjoy a social tariff for their phone and internet  subscription: 40% on the subscription (maximum €8, 40 per month), together with a €3.10 reduction on calls.   24 Budget 2020: €505,000.  25 Indexation of the Fund had been frozen  since 2012, but was reintroduced in 2019. see: https://www.creg.be/sites/default/files/assets/Publications/AnnualReports/2020/CREG -AR2020 -NL.pdf . 26 Fonds social mazout / Sociaal Stookoliefonds  (Programme -Act of 22 December 2008 and Royal Decree of 27/3/2009.  27 A financing system where reimbursement of healthcare providers is done by the healthcare funds and the patient only has to pay personal co -payments  28 Royal Decree 15 January 2014, http:// www.ejustice.just.fgov.be/eli/besluit/2014/01/15/2014022013/justel.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  People facing structural problems in paying off their debts  within a reasonable time can apply for collective debt mediation. An official mediator is appointed by the court to reach an amicable or ju dicial settlement, involving a remission, amortisation or reduction of the debt. People living on integration income who have problems in paying for the maintenance of their children can receive support from their PCSW (maximum 50% of amounts due per month , with a maximum of €91.66 per month).  A study (Frederickx et al ., 2021) has calculated that households living on integration income who are well informed about all their social rights (with the exception of social housing and housing benefits) and have ac cess to several social institutions and organisations that are responsible for granting these rights, can save between €108 and €214 per month. However, this is only theoretical, since many beneficiaries of integration income are not well informed about th eir rights, rights are mostly not granted automatically, and PCSWs and other social institutions and organisations often do not use ‘social rights exploring guides’ that provide a list of social rights that could possibly be granted.  2 Links with labour mark et activation  One of the conditions for being able to claim the right to social integration is that claimants must demonstrate their willingness to work, unless this is impossible for health or equity reasons. Although the legal framework allows for a stri ct interpretation, the concept of willingness to work refers to a frame of mind which is different from that in respect of unemployment benefit, and which allows for the proof of job -search required to be less stringent. It indicates that applicants should  not resign themselves to their fate, but should actively try to improve their situation. In practice, the minimum requirement is registration with the public employment services (PES). In any event, the condition should be interpreted as an ‘effort commit ment’ rather than a ‘result commitment’ on the part of the applicant. The assessment is made by PCSWs, not the PES.  Since 2016, the individual social integration plan ( geïndividualiseerd project voor sociale integratie  / projet individualisé d’intégration sociale  – PIIS )29 has become the main tool for PCSWs to assess the needs and capacities of integration income beneficiaries. The aim of the PIIS is to support the employment  and social integration of integration income beneficiaries, but also to hold them to account for  their own efforts towards integration. The contract is compulsory (unless there are health or fairness reasons) for people  under 25. For people aged  25 and over, the PIIS is compulsory for new applications or if the y have not claimed the rig ht to social integration in the previous three months. It is always possible to draw up an optional PIIS. PIIS s cover different aspect s of reintegration  – in professional life as well as in society. A distinction is made between the specific PIIS for students to complete their education, and the general PIIS for all other actions to improve integration, especially into the labour market. Under COVID -19, instructions were given to PCSWs by the Federal Service for Social Integration to be flexible in the conclusion of PIIS s with regard to timing, content and obligations , including taking into account the situation regarding health, childcare, access to internet etc30. Number and profile of PIIS participa nts31 In 2020, the number of PIISs concluded among integration income beneficiaries was 106,252 (47% of the total). In 2019, there were 112,400 PIISs (50.56%) out of a total of 222,290 beneficiaries; in 2018, 114,471 out of 219,932 (52%). The  29 Geïndividualiseerd project voor maatschappelijke integratie (GPMI) | POD Maatscha ppelijke Integratie (mi -is.be)  30 210720 -overzicht -covid -19-NL.pdf (armoedebestrijding.be)  31 Focus 23  – Het geïndividualiseerd project voor maatschappelijke integratie (GPMI) | POD Maatschappelijke Integratie (mi -is.be) ; https://stat.mi -is.be/nl/form/export/comparedashboardbis  