Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  Access to good -quality services i s essentially provided through the right to social assistance. This right encompasses a wide variety of services including additional financial support, medical assistance, energy assistance, debt mediation, and housing facilities.  PCSWs have discretionary  powers to intervene in respect of a variety of costs through the right to social assistance. When PCSWs consider the integration income to be insufficient, they can provide recipients with additional financial support. The procedures are different from ce ntre to centre and not always standardised within centres. It is therefore difficult to provide a general assessment of the efforts made to link recipients of guaranteed minimum income to good -quality services. The absence of standard regulations in respec t of social assistance may result in unequal treatment of benefit recipients and in legal insecurity.  As outlined above (Section2), PIISs have become the main instrument for PCSWs to assess the needs of integration income recipients. The plans cover diffe rent aspects of reintegration, into professional life as well as society. In theory, the PIIS method foresees an assessment of the social needs of minimum income  beneficiaries. However, PIISs are also an instrument that makes the right to social assistance  subject to the conclusion of a ‘contract’ that imposes obligations and conditions on recipients. An evaluation study (Albertijn et al ., 2021b) has shown that PIISs are mainly focused on socio -professional integration: 65% of PIISs refer to employment as a n area of action required, 36% to language and social integration, 24% to housing, 20% to health, 19% to financial issues, 18% to social security and administrative questions, 14% to training, 8% to social relations and family, 6% to debt, and 5% to leisur e time. Most PCSWs don’t have the capacity to provide social services related to other areas of life; they have to rely on the ‘social mapping’ of local social services and civil society organisations to which they can refer integration income beneficiarie s in order to address their social problems. PCSWs also face budgetary and legal limits to fully play a significant role in providing social services to clients.  Since 2003, a special programme has existed at the FPSSI to help  PCSWs contribute to the part icipation and social activation (PSA) of vulnerable beneficiaries of integration income who are far removed  from the labour market. PSA has three modules: promotion of social participation, organisation of collective initiatives, and combatting child pover ty. All PCSWs receive funding to finance participation of integration income beneficiaries in social, cultural or sports activities, organise collective sessions in social coaching , or finance initiatives that can contribute to alleviating child poverty42. A special working group on social activation has been created at the FPSSI to support PCSWs participating in the initiative. An evaluation study on PSA (Albertijn et al ., 2021a) has show n that 33% of funding is spent on social integration activities (espe cially school activities, sports and leisure), 34% on collective sessions (mostly on education with regard to healthy food and health, and job application training) , and 38% on initiatives for combatting child poverty.  In 2015, the Miriam pilot project was launched in six PCSWs, aimed at reintegrating single mothers who face multiple problems in relation to many areas of life (e.g. financial, housing, childcare, social isolation, lack of education, and language). Case managers worked with 77 sing le mothers to resolve social and cultural issues that lead to poverty for single mothers. They have constructed networks of social services that are embedded in neighbourhoods, to be able to offer the women the necessary support. They work closely with the  social workers responsible for the guidance of the administrative dossiers of women in the project. Impact evaluation studies show that this approach has not only improved the women's mental well -being and self - 42 Royal Decree of 10 January 2017. Budget 2020: €15.7 million.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  18  confidence, but also solved problems linked to housing, childcare, and mobility, and has led to several women participating in training, and sometimes even to finding a job. The evaluation also shows that, in order to mainstream this approach throughout the country for all PCSWs, a significant switc h in the general approach is needed, away from vocational activation -only approaches. It also requires more staff and a bigger budget to be able to ensure holistic coaching of minimum income  beneficiaries with multidimensional problems and to build strong local networks of social services. In November 2021, the government decided to increase the budget for Miriam, from €435,000 to €4.5 million, to increase to number of PCSWs and coaches involved in the programme.  Extra services are targeted through individu al assessments of the needs of integration income beneficiaries by social workers.  4 