Links with labour market activation  The Bulgarian state does not submit detailed statistics on the recipients of monthly social assistance allowances, limiting the accuracy of estimates of the proportion of MI recipients subject  to activation requirements.  The activation requirement applies to individuals deemed ‘fit for work’, which is related to the established working age in Bulgaria (up to 61 years and six months for women, and 64 years and three months for men, in 2020). Rec ipients of monthly social assistance allowances who are within the working age group cannot decline mandatory work envisaged in the benefit scheme.  An unemployed person must have been registered with the Employment Office Directorate for at least six month s before submitting their claim. Within that time, they must not have rejected any jobs or training (literacy, professional qualifications, key competencies) or programmes/projects financed with EU and other international funds . The following categories of  people are exempt:   A parent caring for a child un der the age of three ;  A person with disabilities and permanently reduced capacity of 50% or more;   A person caring for a sick member of the family;   A person with psychiatric illness;   Over -18s engaged in full -time education ;  Pregnant women after the third month of pregnancy.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  Until their sixth consecutive month of uninterrupted registration with the Employment Office Directorate , no DMI is  determined for  the unemployed person.   Since 2002, the labour participation of unemployed candidates or recipients of monthly allowances  is an essential assessment criterion. More specifically, unemployed people who are eligible for monthly allowances are obliged to joi n employment program mes. In 2010, the Social Assistance Act added employment and training to its assessment criteria (joining property, income, age, health and family status ) in order to ensure th e inclusion of children from poor families in the education system. Where an unemployed member of a household  is not registered with the Employment Office Directorate, monthly social assistance allowances can be  granted only after a detailed social evaluation of the actual household  situation. Statistics on individ ual assessments are not maintained. Unemployed working -age recipients of  monthly social assistance  are activated through  inclusion in employment program mes (under Article 12b of the Social Assistance Act) or the organi sation of mandatory work under municip al program mes for community service  (e.g. provision of social services, environmental programs, program mes for improvement and sanitation of settlements , other program mes for public benefit activities ). Sanctions and penalties for non -compliance  with this requirement include  immediate termination of the aid . No information could be found on the possible combination of benefits and employment, or any potential tapering scheme. Similarly, there is n o detailed public information on how policies to integrate/reintegrate  beneficiaries into the labour market affect the activation of monthly social assistance allowance  recipi ents.  Some 34  459 people participated in activation measures in 2020, 24  335 of whom were unemployed. As of end -September 2021, the re were 30  526 participants (including 21  435 unemployed). In 2020, the number of unemployed people actively seeking work and supported by monthly social assistance allowances amounted to 22 920. According to Social Assistance Agency data, as of end -Septem ber 2021, that figure was 19,096.  These were people receiving monthly social assistance allowances.  This study did not find any evaluation of the effectiveness of activation measures to facilitate monthly social assistance beneficiaries to transition into  employment or social integration.  3 