Impact of MI schemes  In 2020, the BGN 75 monthly  social assistance  allowances covered only 76 000 individuals, or about 1% of the Bulgarian population. At the same time, Eurostat data suggest that over 22% of the population was below the poverty line , with about 10% in deep poverty  (i.e. income below 40% of the median income ). This shows a cl ear need for a urgent reform of Bulgarian MI schemes.  The Bulgarian state perceives that reform as encompassing the following:  MI assessment criteria that are less restrictive  in their income thresholds, thus opening the MI schemes to a larger percentage of the population ; Replacing the GMI  with  a different instrument  that take s into account the real socioeconomic situation , reflect s economic  changes (e.g. inflation), and further boost s the uptake  of the M I scheme;  A working multidimensional institutional mechanism for short -term  and long -term social work with recipients of monthly social assistance allowances . That mechanism would be tailored to the individual and emphasise the dynamics of individual needs  and challenges ; Adequate measures  for labour market activation ;  More comprehensive, open, transparent, and accountable  provision of targeted social services, integrated social services, and support to access general services;  More detailed information  within the annual reports of relevant authoritie s. The current Ministry of Labour and Social Policy has indicate d its commitment to these proposed reforms. However, Bulgaria’s severe political crisis must first be resolved, so that a stable regular cabinet, supported by a united parliamentary majority, can implement such proposals . After three parliamentary elections in quick succession (April, July and November 2021), a regular cabinet was finally formed and approved by the Bulgarian Parliament on 13 Decembe r 2021. The coalition agreement between the four participating parties does not detail any new policies for monthly social assistance allowances and it remains to be seen how the new government will approach such social supports.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  6 