Governance mechanisms  The Social Assistance Agency is the s tate bod y with the competence to administer and control MI monthly benefits . It is established at national level  and has its own regional structures. Services are provided directly to MI recipients at regional level by the Social Assistance Directorates, specifically  their Social Protection Departments.  The Social Service Act states tha t cooperation is organi sed between the municipalities in the district , the district administration , the territorial structures of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy , the Ministry of Health , the Ministry of Education and Science , the Ministry of the Interior and other state bodies , private providers of social services on the territory of the municipality and the district , non -profit legal entities for public benefit , individuals using social services , and  higher schools, training social workers on the territory of the municipality and the district . Te relevant institutions do not make public how that cooperation takes place in practice for recipients of monthly allowances . Decisions of municipal councils are used establish so -called public councils to m anage the implementation of activities in the field of social benefits . These public councils assist in the implementation of  municipal social benefit  policy , as well as in the development of district strategies, municipal program mes, plans and projects re lated to social benefits.  Official data from  the Social Assistance Agency  showed departmental and administrative costs for the monthly social allowances in the amount to BGN 31 112 000  in 2020 . The number of individuals and households  (statistics obtained from the Social Assistance Agency contain summarised numbers for individuals and households) who received monthly social assistance allowances in bad faith was 146 in 2020 and 57 from January -end -September 2021.  The Bulgarian system fo r monitoring and reporting social security, social assistance and social transfers is quite fragmented. It is difficult to determine w hether data are reported because of statutory requirements  (e.g. as per Article 2, para. 2 of the Statute of the Social As sistance Agency), for transparency , or to monitor c ertain indicators, boundary values, achievement of targets , etc.  Article 2, para. 2 of the Statute of the Social Assistance Agency requires the Agency to build, administer and maintain an integrated inform ation system on the implementation of programmes and activities in the field of social assistance, social services and child protection.  Only a limited amount of information from all  reporting/monitoring frameworks is made publicly available. Information o n internal procedures and practices for monitoring expenditure within different government agencies in Bulgaria is not easily available and related research is scarce.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  5 