Summary  2021 was marked by a severe political crisis and three parliamentary elections  in quick succession, resulting in the deferral of much -needed comprehensive reform of the Bulgarian minimum income (MI) scheme.  However, the Bulgarian caretaker government issued a seri es of minist erial  decrees to initiate certain changes. For example, compensation was envisaged for those who dropped out of certain targeted support, such as the targeted heating aid. In August 2021, an amendment to the Regulation on the Implementation of the Social Assistance Act saw an increase in the individual percentages that determine the differentiated minimum income (DMI). That amendment was aimed at increas ing both the threshold and , above all,  the benefits received by the most vulnerable groups( the unemployed, people with disabilities, children, and older people).  The revision of the coefficients will also increase the number of recipients of monthly social assistance allowances. The Bulgarian Recovery and Resilience Plan (October 2021) sent to the EU envisages social  service reform, including a gradual increase in DMI to up to 30% of the poverty line by 2024. The Plan notes this as a separate reform, including adoption of a Social Assistance Code.  The European Commission approved the Plan in the  beginning of April 2022.  Reform of the MI scheme requires a working parliament and regular government. As yet, general minimum income (GMI) continues to serve as the basis for the calculation of monthly social assistance allowances, despite not reflecting  the economic situation in the country . When interviewed for this study, the Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Policy indicated that serious work is underway to replace the GMI, and these efforts should be continued by a regular stable cabinet.  The Mini stry furthermore  indicate d that in the current  draft amendments  to the  Social Assistance A ct foresee to link the  social assistance benefits with the poverty line1.  According to observers, the eligibility criteria for monthly social assistance allowances (Месечни социални помощи)  continue to be restrictive, while the labour market activation and supplementary social services offered to MI benefit  recipients remain  unclear and unsystematic.  According to the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (a stakeholde r interviewed)  “the measures for activation are clear, normatively regulated and linked to the Employment Promotion Act”). According to the Social Assistance Agency  (Агенция за социално подпомагане ), each year, an average  of only 63 000 people a month receive social allowances. The number of households  receiving benefit was 23 699  per month in 2019, and 23 702  in 2020  . M onthly social assistance allowances  are failing to achieve the desired results of wider labour market  inclusion  and significan t poverty reduction.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; th irdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, fi nally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have oc curred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.   1 The draft amendments have not been made public as of May 2022 when this report has been revised.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  1 Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  Monthly social assistance allowances ( Месечни социални помощи ) are granted to people who have exhausted a ll possibilities for self -support and for subsistence  under Article 140 of the Family Act (allowances from children and parents, spouse, ex -spouse, grandchildren and great -grandchildren, siblings, etc.).  Those whose income for the preceding month is lower than the determined differentiated minimum  income (DMI) have a right to monthly social support in cash. The entitlement to the support is determined on a per -household  (family)  basis.  Monthly social assistance allowances are income -tested and based on entitlement to the General Minimum Income (GMI).  According to the Social Assistance Agency  (Агенция за социално подпомагане ), an average of 63  000 people currently receive monthly social allowances.  The number of households receiving  monthly social assista nce allowances was 23 699 in 2019 and 23 702 in 2020. The draft budget for 2022  (not yet approved by the Bulgarian Parliament) aims to increase the average monthly number of households (families) under the programme to 34 800 in 2022. Nearly 35 000 cases o f assistance are expected in 2022, covering some 76 000 people, or just over 1% of the Bulgarian population.  Official 2020 data for the Social Assistance Agency reported the departmental and administrative costs of administering monthly social allowances a s BGN 31 112 000 (aroun d EUR 15 .9 million ) a year . The Agency's reports give a general figure rather than a detailed breakdown of administrative costs.  An official from the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy interviewed indicated that administrative cost s are not included in the amounts  shown in the reports .  Bulgaria’s social assistance has been criticised by both the European Commission and the local non -governmental sector for being insufficient, poorly targeted, and failing to reduce poverty and inequ ality. In 2021, an increase of 10% was approved by the Government for 2022, 36.5% for  2023, 22.4% for 2024. Th is impl ies an increase of 84% in the DMI by 2024. In defence of this de lege lata  system of benefits, an official from the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy interviewed argued  that : “The assessment here is based only on the  effect on reducing poverty and inequalities , but this  is not the aim of Social assistance . In addition,  the effect of heating allow еness is not taken into account.”  Additional  expenditure of BGN 6 million has been proposed  in the draft State budget for 2022.  When interviewed for this report, the Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Policy agreed that the assessment criteria are inefficient. The non -governmental organisation (NGO), Institute for Market Economics (IME), has suggested doubling the GMI from BGN 75 to BGN 150 from 2022 onwards. This would put the GMI at about 20% of median net household income in the country, or one -third of the poverty line. That scenario would see the number of beneficiaries of monthly social assistance allowances increase to about 280  000, over 4% of the population. Other stakeholders interviewed noted that fixing the GMI to median income is not an appropriate solution, however, as the latter is not under government control. The Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Policy indicated that work is ongoing to replace the GMI with more effective schemes  (e.g. harmonised criteria for monthly social assista nce allowances and targeted heating benefits). That work will be considered by the regular government, which was formed and underwent parliamentary approval on 13 December 2021.  In defence of this de lege lata  system of benefits, an official from the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy interviewed argued, as follows: “ It tends to be the case that the assessment, conclusions and recommendations made here regarding the monthly benefit  provided under the Social a ssistance act do not take account of their purpose and the beneficiaries  targeted, as  clearly defined in the Social assistance act. Social assistance benefits are no t the  sole mean s of tackling poverty. They are only one of Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  the measures  that are in place  which are intended to do this . Their purpose is to meet the basic vital needs of people who cannot cope on their own. They are provided to families not individuals, so the specific characteristics of people need to be considered. In doing this , no form of d iscrimination is allowed. ” No changes  were introduced to the scheme of monthly social assistance allowances since the outbreak of the COVID -19 pandemic.  1.1  Eligibility  The monthly social assistance allowance is means -tested . Some other benefits (such as fam ily benefits) are explicitly excluded from the income considered when assessing entitlement to monthly social assistance.  Income from all sources is taken into account when determining the entitlement to benefits (including labour, activity in agriculture,  forest and water farms, sale of chattel or real estate, sale of stocks/shares/trade, rent and least, copyright and licences, dividends and income from shareholding, bonuses and awards, indemnifications and benefits, pensions, scholarships, benefits for ch ildren, alimony). The claimant should not possess movable property that can be a source of income, except for the assets serving the usual needs of the family  (agricultural land, small agricultural equipment, household goods, handicraft tools and farm anim als, whe re the resulting income serves to meet the daily living needs of individuals and families ). Company ownership and shares, civil law claims, bank accounts and securities over BGN  500 (EUR 256) per family member (including children) are excluded from  the means test. Combined earned income is possible provided the person still meets the conditions for entitlement. Some earned income (cultivation of land, participation in programmes for the promotion of employment, etc.) is explicitly excluded from the income taken into account when assessing entitlement.  An age criterion  is set in the determination of the differentiated minimum income  (DMI) . For instance , for individuals  aged 75+  living alone , the DMI amounts to  165% of the GMI; for persons 65+ living alone , it is 140% of  the GMI, etc. Applicants’ r esidence  is also taken into account , for example whether they live  alone or in a household, whether they own any  real estate, etc.  The evaluation of needs is done by qualified social workers employed by the regional offices of the Social Assistance Agency. Claimants must first submit an application for monthly social assistance allowances , then, within 20 days, a social worker carries out a social evaluation and prepares a ‘ social report ’. The social ev aluation takes into account all declared and other economic, social, family and health circumstances related to applicant ’s ability  to provide themselves  with the necessary subsistence means.  The director of the local Social Assistance Agency office receiv es the social report and decides on the applicant ’s eligibility, within seven days. The applicant has the right to appeal the decision before the regional director and the re levant a dministrative court.  The property and living conditions of individuals or families are subject to a social inquiry by a representative of the regional Social Assistance Directorate. Applications  must contain the following information:   Personal and address details of the applicant ;  Reasons for applying for benefits;   Family status  ;  Economic status, i.e. employee, unemployed, student, pensioner;   Health status;   Personal details of all adult s living  in the same household;   Personal details and health status of children under 18 years of age living in the family;   Whether the children attend school;  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4   Income from all sources;   Information on movable and immovable property, and other assets;   Declaration that the applicant meets the means -related conditions ;   Declaration that the applicant  is aware of the consequences of providing incorrect information.  Beneficiaries are obliged to declare all changes in their incomes, property, family status, health condition, professional and educational activity, etc., no later than one month after such changes. Failure to do so results in a one -year suspension of their monthly social assistance allowances.  Anyone in Bulgaria can apply for monthly social assistance allowances, but the income criterion is quite narrow. The main eligibility criterion is income, which excludes a large number of those  below the poverty line. For example, people retired typically receive pensions (with some rare exceptions) and that small income almost always exceeds the very restrictive criteria for monthly social assistance. Even the social pension (the smallest possi ble pension) exceeds the DMI for one or two adults, automatically excluding pensioners’ households from monthly social assistance allowances.  In defence of this de lege lata  system of benefits, an official  from the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy inte rviewed argued  that  “There are no regulated main and secondary criteri a. All have equal importance,  making any  assessment  complicated . Giving priority to  in come is to view the system  through the prism of poverty, without taking account of the specific circumstances in Bulgaria. ” The recipients of monthly social assistance allowances are not comprehensively targeted, nor are they offered adequate  tailored social care  to support them to es cape poverty. Such support tends to be ad hoc  and depends entirely o n the efforts of an individual social worker. These issues have prompted calls for urgent reform in the structuring and provision of monthly social assistance allowances . As against this , the  official interviewed from the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy insisted that “Social assistance is not a question of the subjective efforts of social workers, but legally regulated procedures under clear conditions and rules, compliance with which is also subje ct to legal control. This guarantees citizens’ rights. ”, as well as emphasising that escaping poverty is not the aim of the Act.  1.2  Coverage  The application process itself is not considered overly burdensome by relevant stakeholders (e.g. IME), but the evaluation criteria are strongly criticised. Official data on the implementation of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy’s budget in 2020 showed that the costs of monthly social assistance allowances did not increase during the COVID -19 crisis, but, ra ther, fell by more than 3%. For example, in 2020, an average of 23  702 individuals and households received monthly social assistance allowances, compared to 23  699 in 2019. This points to eligibility criteria so restrictive that even a serious labour marke t shock prompts no increase in the numbers of individuals and families supported. That restriction stems directly from the use of the GMI as the primary eligibility criterion for monthly social assistance allowances.  In 2020, monthly social assistance of B GN 75 was paid to under 1% of the Bulgarian population. At the same time, Eurostat data showed over 22% of the population below the poverty line, with about 10% in deep poverty (income below 40% of the median income). Data from the Ministry of Labour and S ocial Policy (Preliminary Assessment of the Impact of a Draft Decree of the Council of Ministers amending the Regulation for the Implementation of the Social Assistance Act) were published on the strategy.bg portal in 2021 and showed a continuous downward trend in the number of recipients of monthly social assistance allowances, due to the lack of update to the GMI (2020 a nnual report of the Bulgarian Social Assista nce Agency ). In defence of th e de lege lata  system of benefits, an official interviewed from the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy argued  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  that  “This conclusion does not take account of one major fact , that social assistance benefit s are granted only when they are is requested.”  The official argued as well that the amoun t of benefit received should also be considered in the light of the monthly social benefit assistance targeted at families with children under the age of 14, introduced  in c onnection with the pandemic.  Bulgarian State reports do not differentiate between different social groups (sex, age, ethnicity, gender, social status, etc.) receiving monthly social assistance allowances, nor is that information collected or published by t he Bulgarian National Statistical Institute.  In 2019, 3  751 applications f or monthly social assistance allowances  were rejected, rising to 4  504 in 2020. As of 31 October 2021, 3 589  were rejected . No information was obtained on numbers of applications  lodged. This study found no estimates of non -take -up of monthly social assistance allowances, nor are any such figures produced by the authorities . 1.3  Adequacy  The amounts payable under the monthly social assistance allowance scheme are not adequate to reduce poverty in Bulgaria  (as argued by the Ministry, the latter is not the specific purpose of the Social Assistance Act) . Social Assistance Agency data for 2020 showed a total number of beneficiaries (including family members) of about 76 000 people - 45 000 adults and 31 000 children, just over 1% of the population. In 2020, monthly allowances were received by an average of 23 702 individuals and households, totalling BGN 28.4 million, significantly lower than amounts set aside for other social programm es. The monthly social  assistance allowances  in Bulgaria  are granted on the basis of the DMI, wh ich is determined by multiplying the individual coefficient for each person or household  by the GMI. The GMI  is currently BGN 75, while individual coefficients vary depending on age, marital status, health and property status. In the most common cases, the coefficients for each person vary from 0.66 , for a person of working age living with other people, to 1.65 , for a person 75 + living alone.  The coefficients  for determining the DMI  are to  be increased annually, as follows:  for 2022, by a coefficient of 1.1; for 2023 , by a coefficient of 1 .365;  for 2024 , by a coefficient of 1.224.  Almost 35  000 cases of assistance are expected in 2022, covering some 76 000 people,  again just over 1% of the population.  1.4  Links with other benefits  The monthly social assistance allowances can be combined with the following benefits  that are available to everyone (not solely GMI recipients) :  Other social assistance benefits;   Non-contribu tory benefits for people with disabilities , provided on a monthly basis;   Single birth grants;   Death grant ( помощ при смърт на осигурено лице ). Additional healthcare, housing and cash supplements are available to claimants that meet certain criteria  (see examples below). The same eligibility criteria apply in all municipalities.   One -off benefits under Art icles  16, 16a and 17 of the Regulation for the implementation of the Social Assistance Act.  In 2020, 14  463 one -off benefits were granted, totalling  BGN 6  486  448. In 2019, 7  156 individuals and households received a total of BGN 2  390  973. This one -off aid is intended for: 1) meeting incidental health, educational needs, utility needs and other vital needs of individuals and households (granted once a year, up to five times the amount of the GMI);  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  2) issuance costs for an ID card – granted once, up to the amount of the GMI;  3) vital medical treatment abroad.  Monthly targeted assistance for parents with children up to 14 years of age in cases of declar ed state of emergency or an emergency epidemic situation, pursuant to Art icle  16b of the Regulation for the implementation of the Social Assistance Act.  This assistance is provided to parents who are not able to perform their work duties remotely, are not able to use paid leave, or do not receive cash benefits for temporary incapacity for work due to illness and maternity (independent benefit from the GMI). The monthly targeted assistance is also provided to parents who have lost their jobs for reasons stem ming from a declared state of emergency or an emergency epidemic. As of 31 December 2020, a total of BGN 18  596  995 had been directed to 22  854 households.  Targeted social benefits for rental support ( under  Art icle  14 of the Regulation for the implementat ion of the Social Assistance Act).  The latter are intended for the payment of rent for municipal housing for single parents, elderly people living alone ( aged 70+), and orphans up to 25 years of age, who have graduated from a social training and vocational  centre. In 2020, an average of 136 people were supported per month  for the whole year , and the amount paid was BGN 68  569. In 2019, an average of 149 people were supported per month  for the whole year , totalling BGN 95  633.  Targeted benefits for diagnosis  and medical treatment.  These benefits cover the costs of hospital medical care for diagnosis and treatment of people without an income and/or personal property allowing them to hold health insurance (benefit exists independently of the GMI). The funds for  the payment of hospital treatment are provided from the budget of the Social Assistance Agency and paid to hospitals through the National Health Insurance Fund. In 2020, this benefit covered 4  529 people, with BGN 3  613  041 transferred to the medical esta blishments for hospital care through the National Health Insurance Fund. In 2019, BGN 3  305  725 was used to provided medical care for 4  252 people.  This study did not find any comprehensive national assessment of whether these  overall support s met or fully  covered recipients ’ needs.  2 