Links with labour market activation  Unemployed GMB beneficiaries capable of work ing (aged between 15-65) must be registered with  the Croatian Public Employment Service (Hrvatski zavod za zapošljavanje ) and must accept any job offer, regardless of their qualifications or experience, including temporary and seasonal jobs. Exceptions to these rules are:   People who are within five  years of entitlement to the old -age pension ;  Children up to the age of 15 , or older for the period of their regular education, or young adults up to 29 until the end of their education ;  Pregnant women and new mothers  for up to six months after giving birth; parents caring for children up to the age of one for one child, up to three for twins, and up to 10 for three or more children, as well as parents on adoption leave ;  People wholly incapable of working ;  Those established as being temporarily unemployable by a competent authority, according to special regulations ;  Unemployed fam ily members with no  income , caring for a child or for an adult family member who is unable to take care of themselves, insofar as the care provided replaces institutional care under the Social Welfare Act.   If recipients of GMB (specifically the claimants)  refuse a job offer or terminate their employment, their right to benefit can be suspended for a period of six months. Claimants capable of work ing are required to take part in active labour market policy (ALMP) measures and must participate  as directed in community work programmes organi sed by local authorities for 30 -90 hours per month . If they do not comply, the ir GMB  entitlement is suspended .  According to the Croatian Employment Service database, in 2018, 26  235 unemployed  GMB beneficiaries were registered out of 148  919 registered unemployed, compared to 23 876 unemployed GMB out of 131  753 total in 2019, and 25  586 unemployed GMB out of 159  845 total registered unemployed in 2020.   Activation regime:  All unemployed ( inclu ding unemployed GMB beneficiaries) registered  with the Croatian Public Employment Service must prepare an  employment plan , which comprises several activities:  1) The Ordinance on Active Job Search  applies to all unemployed people (including GMB beneficiari es). The Ordinance stip ulates that all unemployed people should be Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  involved in individual counselling within 15 days of registering as unemployed , and should create a professional job search plan with a counsellor within 60 days . 2) If the person is not em ployed within 12 months of their entry in the unemployment register , they should be included  in m otivational counselling  and should  draft and sign an agreement on inclusion in the labour market ( individual action plan).  The professional job search plan and  the labour market inclusion agreement determine the  person’s  obligations and activities, and the manner and time of execution of a particular activity. For example, l ong -term unemployed GMB beneficiaries may  be involved in workshops on acquiring active job search skills , or GMB beneficiaries maybe included in a community work programme. In 2018 , an activation programme for the long -term unemployed aimed to recogni se and overcome obstacles in  their  job search, strengthen their motivation to accept work,  and motivate them to take a more active approach to their job search. If a beneficiary does not comply with the employment activation rules and procedures , they may be removed fro m the unemployment register and l ose their GM B benefit.  Inclusion in ALMPs : In 2018, 886 or 3.4% of all registered unemployed GMB beneficiaries  were included in ALMPs , compared to 1 706 or 7.1% of all registered unemployed GMB beneficiaries . Data for 2020 are not representative, due to th e COVID 19 lockdown. According  to Croatian Employment Service data, g eneral unemployed participation in ALMP was 24 .1% in 2018 and 28.7% in 2019 . Unemployed GMB beneficiaries a ppear less likely to be activated through ALMP measure s. GMB recipients most oft en participate in public work and education ALMPs , although precise data are not publicly available. If engaged in community work (initiated by the local community or civil society organi sations), the GMB is not suspended.  Information exchange on unemployed GMB beneficiaries: The CSW and the Croatian Employment Service are obliged to exchange data on beneficiaries of GMB aged between 15 and 65, who are unemployed and able to work , or partially able to work. There are two types of exchange : daily/m onthly and periodic. The daily/monthly exchange is initiated by the CSW to check whether individuals  are registered in the unemployment register. These are individual cases (new users, additional checks for existing users , etc.). Periodic  exchange happens several times a year , whe re all unemployed GMB beneficiaries are checked for registration with the Croatian Employment Service. These checks primarily verify that all GMB beneficiaries fit for work are registered appropriately, as required. Those who are n ot registered  can lose their right to GMB.  Tapering : Those receiving GMB will continue to receive GMB support  for the first three months  - the full amount in the first month of work, 75% in the second month , and 50% in the third month. The right to the GMB  is suspended after three months of work if the average earnings over the period exceed the amount of the GMB.  According to Bejaković et al.  (2012), the accumulation of social benefits, especially  for families with more dependent children and low -skilled beneficiaries whose employment prospects are low-salary jobs only, could end up in a ‘welfare trap ’, with a negative effect of different welfare provision accumulation (GMB, child allowance, etc.)  and reduced motivation for employment. In response, the  Soc ial Welfare Act from 2013 introduced the ‘social benefits ceiling ’, which stipulates that the maximum social benefits accumulated by one household cannot exceed the minimum gross salary in Croatia. However, t his can have negative effects for families with three or more children , particularly  in terms of preventing child poverty.    