Summary  Croatia has a single basic minimum income scheme, the ‘Guaranteed Minimum Benefit’ (GMB) ( Zajamčena minimalna naknada  (ZMN )). The GMB was introduced in the Social Welfare A ct in 2013 and came into effect from 2014. The GMB base was set at HRK  800 (EUR 106) by the Government Decision of 25 September 2014 and was not indexed, meaning that the same base still applies.  The GMB is implemented through local centres for social welfare (CSWs), with funds provided in the central State budget. Positive economic trends and an effective reduction in the income threshold have seen the number of GMB beneficiaries decrease, from 2. 5% of the population in 2015 to around 1.5% of the population in 2020.  Research in Croatia concluded that the GMB scheme is appropriately targeted to the poor, but the low benefit level and relatively low coverage means that the poverty alleviation effect  is relatively weak. In 2018, only about 20% of the people in the first decile of income distribution were covered by the GMB (Thi Viet Nguyen and Rubil, 2021).  There is no research or data on the non -take -up rate in Croatia. Research suggests, however, t hat the coverage rate of the GMB is relatively low, because of the low benefit levels and fairly stringent means test criteria (see Section 1).  The activation of GMB beneficiaries (Pillar 2) is more formal, with a greater focus on sanctions than on real a ctivation. Data suggest that the inclusion of GMB beneficiaries in active labour programmes is relatively small (see Section 2). Pillar 3 (supplementary social services) is at the very early stage of development in Croatia.  This fiche describes the main ch aracteristics of the guaranteed minimum income scheme (represented by the GMB) in Croatia , labour market activation of GMB beneficiaries, additional supplementary social services, governance mechanisms, and the impact of GMB scheme on poverty.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evi dence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.   