Impact of MI schemes  Several research studies on  social assistance and the GMB  system concluded that the GMB in Croatia is well targeted at  the poor (Babić, 2008; World Bank, 2014; Thi Viet Nguyen and Rubil , 2021). It was also found to be relatively well organised through Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  longstanding CSWs, with trained  staff (mostly social case workers) and good technological equipment (Government of Croatia, 2011).  Despite effective targeting , the low benefit level affects GMB adeq uacy , with only a limited effect on alleviating poverty . Coverage of the poor by the GMB has also been found to be relatively low : ‘In 2018, it covered approximately 80  000 beneficiaries, which was only about 20 % of the people in the first decile of the in come distribution. An option to expand the coverage and the amount of benefit  is to increase the GMB base , which has been unchanged at HRK 800 /month  per person since the day the program me was introduced…... In addition, some eligibility criteria such as we alth  tests might be relaxed to potentially include more people in the program me’ (Thi Viet Nguyen and Rubil , 2021 , p.35). Several older papers or reports published on the GMB scheme ( e.g. Šućur, 2005; Babić 2008)  pointed to several seri ous shortcomings. Firstly, t he value of the GMB depends on an arbitrary decision made by the Government. It does not use any kind of reference budget to set levels of benefit and no indexation is implemented. The GMB base is set at a very low level, at EUR  106 for an adult  in 2020, compared to t he relative poverty threshold for a one -member household of EUR 385. In some cases, a low level of GMB plus very strict means -test procedures result in exclusion of poor people from the right to GMB ( e.g.  because they have a car). No data are available on the ta ke-up rate. Activation of unemployed GMB beneficiaries capable of working is not very effective , as evident in the very low inclusion of GMB beneficiaries in ALMP measures (see Section 2). Coordinat ion between the CSWs and the Croatian Employment Service aimed at activating  the unemployed is very formal  and focuses primarily on sanctions rather than activation .  The  stringent asset test  sees possession of a car as grounds for exclusion from the right  to GMB . Following media discussion6, the new Social Welfare Act proposes changing this con dition to set a car value of higher than  HRK 20  000 (EUR 3  000). Owning (or selling) a second piece of real estate (house, flat, land , etc.) as an exclusion criteri on can also be problematic in some situations. There  are areas in Croatia ( e.g. Slavonia) where real estate has a very low value  and is difficult to sell. It is therefore possible that a family of GMB beneficiaries living in Zagreb in their own apartment  that inherits (almost worthless) real estate in Slavonia may lose the right to GMB.  It can be concluded that the GMB  scheme has very limited capacity to lift the poor out of poverty and help them to live a decent life, instead providing them with GMB benef its that are barely enough to survive. There is significant room to improve the GMB scheme  in terms of adequacy, coverage rate , and activation  (e.g.  through mentorships and tailor ed ac tivation programmes ).  6 https://slobodnadalmacija.hr/vijesti/hrvatska/ministarstvo -ukida -sve -obiteljske -domove -znacajno -se-dizu -i-iznosi -socijalne -pomoci -za-pojedine -kategorije -osoba -evo -tko-sve -moze -ostvariti -pravo -1132779   