Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  In 2014, Cyprus introduced a Guaranteed Minimum Income - GMI (Ελάχιστο  Εγγυημένο  Εισόδημα  – ΕΕΕ ) –scheme, which replaced  the old sui generis  ‘public assistance’  system, under which  discretionary payments were based, inter alia, on the assessment of household means and the existence of dependent  relatives. The system had proved indispensable (e.g. for coping with the urgent social needs following the dramatic event s of the 1974 Turkish invasion ). However , it had many drawbacks, such as the exclusion of the working poor, a wide scope for discretionary payments, imperfect targeting , and the absence of effective activation support  (Pas hardes, 2009; Pashardes and Polycarpou, 2011) .  Against this backdrop, i t was decided that, instead of modifying the old system, a completely new system, with a different logic and characteristics, needed to be introduced. The related reform was included i n the ‘Memorandum  of Understanding’  (henceforth MoU) , which was signed in 2012 by the Cypriot government and the international lenders to the country,  and was presented as a means to address the shortcomings of the old system and improve social protection.   The new scheme was rapidly designed and came into effect via the 109(Ι)/2014  GMI and Social Benefits Law, which  paved the way  for the reform of the entire Cypriot social security system (Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021: 5 -6). The 2014 law, which  in the years that followed would have been complemented by a series of amendments1, explicitly  referred to the right of all legal residents to enjoy a minimum acceptable standard of living.   A direct consequence of th e ties existing  between the GMI and th e MoU  was that, due to the constraints set in place in the MoU, the scheme couldn’t be smoothly introduced. For example, a new service was created (the Welfare Benefits Administration Authority – henceforth WBAS) for the administration of the GMI (as well as of all other welfare benefits) , without being able to hire even a single permanent employee until 2019 ; whereas the Director of WBAS was hired in November 2021 (with the rest of the permanent hierarchy still pending).  The above  mentioned conditions dictated that this major reform would have to be introduced in phases . Hence,  the GMI, along with all of its complementary components and associated policies, was gradually rolled out between the years 2014 and 2019. For example, services for lo ng-term care , in their current comprehensive form, which distinguis hes between institutional and home care and between disabled persons’ needs and old age social care needs , had initially been introduced in 2016; but only in 2019 were they fully developed.  The Cypriot GMI was incorporated into a social protection system , which is characterised , inter alia, by the following: the relatively low level of social expenditure; the relative underdevelopment of minimum income protection; the high reliance on famili es as care -providers, often substituting for inadequate state provisions; the low level  of autonomy  for young people  (as manifested in the high rates of co -residence of parents and adult children); the high level of inter -generational solidarity (with pare nts often complementing the income of their adult  1 See:  http://www.mlsi.gov.cy/mlsi/mlsi.nsf/All/048229AFBB4B60A6C2258599002E6213  and  http://www.cyla w.org/nomoi/indexes/2014_1_109.html . More specifically, these amendments are mainly included in Laws 135(I)2014; 173(I)2014; 195(I) 2014; 3(I) 2015; 118(I) 2015; 36(I)2017; 114(I) 2017; 2(I) 2018; 135(I) 2019; 164(I) 2019; 23(I) 2020 , 3 (I) 2022 . Amendments are also accompanied by a series of regulatory administrative acts.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  children2). Differences from the so-called ‘Mediterranean’ or ‘southern European’ welfare regime , on the other hand,  include d the residual and means -tested route followed by the Cypriot healthcare system f or decades – which, nevertheless, was recently transformed to a universal syste m – or the provision of subsidised  childcare, among other things  (Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021: 2) .  Within this context , the C ypriot GMI is , overall,  character ized by a modern and relatively comprehensive design, providing, in principle, holistic protection with  rather few apparent weaknesses, such as the limited coverage of certain groups, which might be at risk of high poverty ; e.g. up until recently of the workin g poor  (Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021: 6) . The scheme consists of three pillars: income support, access to services , and activation. The first pillar is based on a monthly cash benefit, which is defined as the difference between the actual income of the r ecipient unit and a pre -specified basic amount, corresponding to the minimum standard of living accepted by society. The amount of the basic monthly cash benefit for a single adult equals €480  (increasing by 50 % for each additional adult and by 30 % for eac h additional child).   The level of the basic amount is calculated using reference budget methodology and varies depending on the size and age structure of the recipient unit.  Hence,  in 2020,  the level of the basic amount  was  a little bit more than half  the monthly at-risk -of-poverty threshold (60% of median equivali zed income)  for a single person (€835.16 per month or  €10,022  per year )3.  The GMI is calculated by subtracting the family income from the basic needs (plus housing needs ). More specifically : o Applicant needs =  €480  o Spouse and children between the ages of 14 and 28 =  €240  o Children under the age of 14 = €144  o Rent or loan interest = Depending on family composition and district  ▪ Disability benefit and social coherence measures  The second pillar provides  access to subsidi zed or free -of-charge services  (e.g.  healthcare, discounts on electricity, free attendance at government institutes of education, psychological and career advice services, and, in the case of recipients with dependants, subsidi zed childcare  and long -term care ). The GMI also covers municipal taxes, sewage taxes, municipal garbage collection charge s and certain extraordinary needs.  The  third pillar includes programmes targeted at the labour market integration of GMI beneficiaries, as exemplified by vocational, education and training ( henceforth VET) programmes.  These services and programmes are deemed to be needed for activating recipi ents  (Koutsampelas, 2016).  Over two thirds of public social assistance in Cyprus is now reported to be channelled through the GMI , meaning that the services linked to the GMI respond to the two thirds of all the publicly provided assistance in the country  (European Commission, 2018: 40).  By the end of 2017, the number of households receiving GMI was 27,550. The total cost (which included  expenses on basic and housing needs and the disability benefit, but excluded  care, extraordinar y needs and municipal taxe s) amounted to  €211  2 Please note, however, that , in the case of the GMI , work -related income from children aged between 18 and  28 is partially exclud ed from the household income. This  acts as a n incentive to be work -active, therefore leading those aged 18 to 28  to be independent from their parents.   3 See : https://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?da taset=ilc_li01&lang=en .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  million . The overall cost for GMI, which included payments for all GMI benefits, was €221 million.  The following table includes data on the actual expenditure on the GMI and on the number of family units having access to the scheme between the years 2015 and 2021:  Year – Actual Expenditure – Family Units  2015  €75, 404 ,628  20,700  2016  €194 ,234 ,375  25,980  2017  €221 ,167 ,521  27,550  2018  €220 ,182 ,462  25,078  2019  €197 ,955 ,444  22,377  2020  €199 ,096 ,807  22,179  2021  €200 ,509 ,134  20,882  Based on the data provided by the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance, t he number of  the family units receiving the GMI has therefore been constantly decreasing since 2017, when it was at its maximum (appx. 27 ,550 family units) . This outcome is  due to the implementation of effective labour activation measures, alongside increased job availabi lity and improved eligibility control methods.  The above  data should be viewed in conjunction with relevant national concepts, and especially the absolute poverty  threshold, which is calculated, on a regular basis , in accordance with the results of a minim um consumption basket survey ( by using the budget standards method). The absolute poverty level represents the minimum income level required for achieving a decent standard of living and goes beyond a subsistence standard of living. In 2017, t he number of people  in severe poverty in Cyprus was  estimated at 23,000, while the number of those in poverty was much higher , at approximately 134,000  (defining the severe poverty threshold as 40% of median household disposable income and the poverty threshold as 60%). Hence, given that the number of GMI beneficiaries for the year 2017 was  estimated to be 48,955, the Cypriot scheme seems to have been quite successful in ‘covering’ those in severe poverty. . (See also European Commission, 2020a: p.5, p.16, p.43, p.45, which concluded that: ‘ Strong economic growth and the introduction of a guaranteed minimum income have had a significant positive impact on poverty and quality in Cyprus’ ).  A similar conclusion could be reached for more recent years , when taking into account that  the number of those at  risk of poverty in 2020 was  127,000  (with a cut -off point equal to  60% of median equivali zed income after social transfers)4; and 23,000  (with a cut-off point  equal to  40% of the median equivali zed income) 5  1.1  Eligibili ty  Based on t he GMI -related  legislation , access to the GMI  is determined on the basis of income, age, nationality, residency, employment status , and the financial assets ofapplicants and beneficiaries6. Applicants and beneficiaries must also satisfy a number of job -related conditions , such as being register ed with the PES and accepting  4 See : https://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=ilc_li02&lang=en .  5 See : https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/ILC_LI02__custom _1565249/default/table?lang=en .  6See the attached link , giving  access to a document discussing all conditions  for access to the GMI (in Greek) : http://www.mlsi.gov.cy/mlsi/mlsi.nsf/01D602B67BF349BEC2257E8F0044ABF7/$f ile/%CE%92%CE%B1%CF%83%CE%B9%CE%BA%CE%AD%CF%82%20%CE%A0%CF%81%CF%8C%CE%BD%CE%BF%CE%B9%CE%B5%CF%82%20%CF%84%CE%B7%CF%82%20%CE%9D%CE%BF%CE%BC%CE%BF%CE%B8%CE%B5%CF%83%CE%AF%CE%B1%CF%82%20%CE%95%CE%95%CE%95.pdf   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  ‘suitable’ jobs. Not conforming to these conditions  endangers eligibility  (Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021: 6). A social i mpact assessment carried out  in 2013 -2014  played a role in shaping the eligibility criteria for the GMI . According to the various decision par ameter inputs and the relevant outputs of the models  used, the optimal solut ions were reported to be chosen. The main objectives pursued by the authorities responsible were  to eliminate and/or reduce the number of people living in absolute poverty,  reduce the poverty gap  by focusing on the most vulnerable, and lift number of households above  the relevant poverty thres hold7.  After running various sets of decision parameters , the final GMI design chosen was  expected to have significant effects on the desired outcomes, while remaining nearly budget -neutral. More specifically, by the second half of 2015, the incidence of povert y (share of poor people in the general  population , meaning the share  of those in poverty  in the total population ) was predicted to fall by 3 .2%; and  the intensity of poverty ( i.e. the gap  between the incom e of the poor and the relative poverty threshold) by 16 .8% (with reductions of  up to 32 .7% for the most vulnerable groups ). Finally,  a reduction of 70% was predicted  in the number of households living below  the absolute poverty threshold in the second half  of 2015 (ILO, 2016) . During  the very first stages  of implementing the Cypriot GMI, several stakeholders (mainly trade unions, but also civil society organisations: see Soumel, 2014) claimed  that they were not given adequate time to effectively participate in the consultation process and to contribute to the design of the scheme. However , the ‘te ething proble ms’ of the GMI are reported to have been  quickly corrected through small -scale legislative interventi ons, which were targeted at increasing the coverage/inclusivity of the scheme.   Examples of such interventions included a legislative modification providin g the Minister of Labour and Social Insurance with discretionary power to grant eligibility to cases of applicants , who were deemed to be in extreme need , even if they failed to satisfy the formal eligibility criteria; and also  a subsequent amendment , base d on  similar logic, and which offer ed the discretion  to award eligibility to people facing ‘extraordinary personal circumstances’, when justifiable . Additionally , after taking into account the large number of households that had experienced significant inc ome reductions during the crisis, while also possessing immovable property that made them ineligible for the GMI support, the government relaxed the asset criteria for access to the scheme. This modification , once again , improved the  coverage /inclusivity  of the scheme , while also encountering public criticism regarding the strictness of the eligibility criteria  (Koutsampelas  and  Pashardes , 2015).  The greatest concern, however, was the scheme’s impact on p overty alleviation. In 2013, an  ex ante  impact assessment of the GMI, conducted by the University of Cyprus, in collaboration with the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the Ministry of Labour  and Social Insurance indicated that the new scheme was clearly more effective and comprehensi ve than the previous  system  of public assistance . Assuming full take -up, the simulations showed that the GMI could  almost eliminate absolute poverty, while significantly reducing relative poverty  (Pashardes, Koutsampelas, and Polycarpou, 2013) .  A subseque nt micro -simulation exercise  verified these results  (Pashardes and Koutsampelas, 2016; European Commission, 2019) . Critics of the GMI argued, however, that the scheme did not eradicate every form of deprivation, as exemplified by the fact that beneficiarie s still faced nutritional risks, which intensified in the case of multi -member families  (Chrysostomou and Andreou, 2017) .   7 See the relevant GMI legislation (the entire l ist is included at the end of this report).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  Additional criticism concerned rising housing costs, prompting  the government to upgrade the GMI -related housing allowance  (Koutsampe las, Andreou and Tsolaki, 2019).  It should be also noted nevertheless that, following a study by the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance,  in August 2019  the rent allowance was increased. The magnitude of the increase varied across cities , but averaged to 50% .  Last, according to research by Chrysostomou, Andreou and Polycarpou  (2017)  a food basket fulfilling physical and non -physical needs is reported as not being affordable among st low-income families (mainly with children) on the GMI scheme . Income/assets taken into account: The GMI -related  legislation refers to the methods used  for setting the income and the assets thresholds used  to determine eligibility8 . The amounts provided as part of the GMI are regarded as being in line with the minimum living needs for beneficiaries  and their famil ies, which are defined as those necessary to live a ‘descent’ life . These standards are not relate d in any way to beneficiaries’ salaries , which depend on their  profession and are often determined through collective agreements.  In order t o define the amou nts connected  with the GMI , the competent authorities took into account the costs (at market prices) of all the goods and services needed  to live, meaning those needed so as to attain  a specified level of minimum living . The following income is taken into account for the purposes of entitlement to GMI: from work (including self -employment); from alimony; from allowances/grants given by the government , and other social benefits; from any pension plan, pension fund, social insura nce plan or occupational plan;  and from real property and movable assets. If claimants  and/or any members  of their  family units own  property worth  more than €100,000 , they are not eligible for the GMI. If they own a residence that does not exceed 300 m2, it does not count towards  the value of family property  used  to determine  eligibility for the GMI . If there is a claim (encumbrance) on the immovable property of GMI applicants  or a right to use it (usufruct), i mmovable property of €100,000 -€200,000 in value is likewise not taken in to account . Moreover, a ny transferred assets are still considered  to be  owned by claimants , if the transfer is regarded as being unnecessary.  Deposits  up to €5,000 for one individual and €1,000 for every dependant  are excluded  (up to a total of €20,000  for additional monetary assets, such as those regarding study loans and scholarships , for people with disabilities,  and  accounts of under -aged persons , before the GMI law was enacted ). Family units or individuals only lose access to the GMI , when they exc eed these amounts.  Exempt in come/assets: The following categories of income are excluded from the calculation s relating  to access to the GMI : soldier's  allowance; allowances and grants provided due to disability; contributions related to charity organi zations /institutions; students’ grants ; funeral allowance; childbirth allowance; any scheme supporting pensioner  households with low income; i ncome relating to training allowances  or to acquiring  vocational experience; m onthly allowances  granted by the Minist ry of Education and Culture to people actively engaged in the field of literature and arts; amounts provided by people  belonging to the family unit from the Welfare Lottery Fund ; and economic assistance granted bythe Deputy Ministry of Social Welfare , as emergency financial aid approved by the Deputy Minister .  Furthermore, when calculating the level of income from  work , a series of  discount s (income disregards) are given  as a work motive .  Larger disregard for income from work for children : if the monthly income from work of either applicants  or their spouses exceeds  €500, the first €170 is excluded. For monthly income less than €500, the first €50 is not taken  into account;  for income between  €50 and  €200, 40% is excluded;  and for income betw een  €200 and  €500,  8 See the relevant legislation at the end of this report.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  20% is excluded.  If applicants  or their spouses have disabilit ies, the first  €512 is excluded. From the monthly income for all adult children under 28, 50% of the first €480 is excluded ; of income between  €480 and €1,000 , 10% is excluded ; of income between €1,000  and € 2,000, 15% is excluded ; and  for income exceeding €2,000, 20% is excluded . GMI applicants are  expected to submit detailed data and the necessary supporting documents on their  income and assets. These documents will ac company their  application for a GMI. For example,  if applicants are dependent employees, they  need  to submit tax declarations for the four previous  years, among other things. Furthermore, if GMI applicant s/bene ficiaries  and/or any members  of their  family units claim  to be incapable of work, due to physical disability, mental disability and/or special personal situations, they  may be referred for social intervention. This includes a medical examination or the provision of other care, depending on the case.  In an attempt to minimize the number of the data submitted by GMI  applicants, the WBAS  has over 30 data connections in effect with other organi zations , including banks, Land and Surveys Department s, as well as Social Insurance Department s. Residence:  GMI b enefi ciaries must be citizens of the Republic of Cyprus, EU citizens or third -country citizens (with an immigration permit and the right to long -term stay in the country) . Valid temporary residence permits are also required for family members of third -coun try nationals who are not GMI applicants. Refugees and victims of trafficking can also apply for the GMI. Refugees must be authori zed to reside in  Cyprus , meaning that they need an acceptance from the asylum service  and a valid residence permit. By contras t, asylum -seekers are not eligible for the GMI. The same goes for applicants residing in a monastery ; but not for homeless people, who are eligible . All GMI applicants must have resided in Cyprus for a continuous five -year period. The five -year residency r equirement applies to  all applicants, except for recogni zed refugees, subsidiary refugees , and victims of trafficking.  A specific article of the legislation addresses the issue of absence from the country. If applicants have  been absent from the country f or more than one calendar month per year, they might lose  access to the GMI (unless deemed to be justified ). All c ases are assessed  by either the Director of the Service or the Committee designated for this. Exceptions include being away  for reasons of health or study.   Age: GMI applicants must be over the age of 28  (there is no upper bound ). Exceptions to this rule include : married c ouples ; single parents ; orphans ; disabled people;  and people  under the age of 28 who, on reaching 18,  were under the care of the Welfare Services Director, and are studying within or outside the borders of Cyprus . The GMI is reported not to address the spe cific needs of young people (for school fees, professional  training, etc.).   Professional training is offered for free within the context of  training  programmes offered in cooperation  with the Human Resource Development Authority  (hen ceforth HRDA) ; an auth ority  which is also under the supervision of the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance  The f amily unit consists of the applicant, the spouse/partner, children under the age of 18 who  live under the same roof and children between the ages of 18 and 28 liv ing in Cyprus or studying abroad.  The reason those aged  18-28 are excluded from access to the GMI is partly associated with the idea that this population group has very much stronger i ncentives to work than their parents  do. It should  be kep t in mind that  youth unemployment  was very high when the GMI was introduced.  Furthermore, an earlier cut -off would arguably force young beneficiaries  with very low income  to set up separate household s sooner , thereby increasing the cost to the state (relative to current arrangements). On the other hand, however, an earlier cut -off would reduce the period during which differential earning disregards between the old and the young within the same Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  househo ld prevail, signal ling  to parents and other adult children that they cannot rely on other family members for support. In this case, those concerned  may be encouraged to seek employment sooner , moderating  the depreciation of skills during unemp loyment and i mproving future employability  – thus ultimate ly costing the state less money . Changing  the cut -off point  for access to the GMI is  therefore  accompanied by both pros and cons  (Christofides and Koutsampelas, 2019: 26) . Students cannot apply for GMI. However, some exceptions are in place (e.g. for people with disabilities).  . Furthermore, given that the student grant is not included in the means -testing related to the scheme, recipient families whose members are in tertiary education are implicitly sub sidized – or at least not penali zed. Similarly, applicants who are on military service do not have  access to the scheme.  Employment status: As also discussed in Section 2  of this report  on labour market activation , the GMI is provided on the conditio n tha t beneficiaries  and all family unit members are actively seeking employment and are therefore registered as unemployed with  the PES . This condition only applies to people  who are capable of working, meaning that they are aged  18-65, not in education or employment , and are not disabled  (and not  regarded as being incapable of working for other justified reasons ).  More specifically, based on the GMI -related legislation, any GMI applicant or beneficiary is obliged to: be registered as unemploye d with  the PES; accept a job offer  that  they are  deemed to be capable of carrying out and conforms with their  skills; not voluntarily terminate their  employment , six months prior to applying, following their  application and during receipt of the GMI; parti cipate in occupational training and/or educational programmes, when required; participate in a community service scheme approved by the Minister of Labour and Social Insurance; a ccept the personali zed services provided by employment counsellors  at the PES;  participate in development and social autonomy programmes; accept meetings and visits by competen t officers at their  residence , aimed  at assessing their  situation and scheduling  activities of occupational counselling, psycho -social support , and social reh abilitation (for their  sake ); and  accept 'social intervention'. If the GMI recipient fails to satisfy these conditions, the n the  GMI may  be terminated immediately (depending, however, on the specific circumstances of each recipient ).  As already mentioned above, these conditions do not apply to GMI applicants and/or beneficiaries who submit evidence that they  are unable to work (due  to physical and/or mental and/or psychological frailty, and/or specific personal situations). The compete nt authority refers these people to ‘social intervention ’, including a medical examination or other type of care, which would be considered appropriate after assessing recipients’  situation.  If GMI recipients  are considered after socia l intervention (appli cable for six  months from the date of decision ) to be voluntarily unemployed , then they  lose  access to the GMI.  There is a periodic assessment of entitlement to the GMI. The competent authorities review, for example, information on people who are not regis tered as unemployed; the income and deposits of GMI beneficiaries ; and the family units benefiting from the GMI. Data on income and assets are collected every month9. Other kinds of data are collected  daily  (labour market participation data , job rejection  and quitting ) or ad hoc (e.g. updating of address  and  family composition ). The data collected are used internally by the WBAS . The list of the administrative data collected includes the following: time between application and first payment; entitlement amount; reason for rejection; duration of benefit spell; compliance with any behavioural requirements (e.g. contact with benefit  agency, active job -search,  9 The information mentioned in this and the next paragraph is based on an OECD questionnaire.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  and availability for work); sanctions (number  and  reasons); amount and date of final payment; and reasons for the end of benefit receipt ( changes  of residence, household circumstances, or assets /income ; employment  or self-employ ment ; retirement ; death ; and sanctions ). The data on benefit claimants and the claims process  are kept in digital form (in a suitably structured database, so  that  individual records can be linked across sources ).  Overall , access to the GMI might appear  complex and involv es significant checks . A major issue that the WBAS faces is that most applications are incomplete, forcing the competent authority to contact applicants for clarifications or specific documents. . The WBAS also attempts to implement various checks , so as  to limit cases of fraud.  .  In an attempt to address the various concerns faced by applicants regarding the  need for communication with the Ministry  officers, the WBAS has a series of actions planned. A new call centre is currently in the final stage of being set up by the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance. The establishment of th is new centre will enhance the level of communication with GMI ben eficiaries/applicants.  The WBAS is also in the process of re -examining the documents required by GMI applicants, so as to simplify the application process and minimi ze the number of the paperwork needed. Moreover , the Service  is planning to be reinforced  with additional personnel. This initiative will provide the WBAS  with the ability to offer customer service points to both GMI applicants and beneficiaries .  Last, t he online application   system, which is currently being developed , is likewise expected to enhance both communication and transparency ; while  the recent launch ofa website , which includes  detailed descriptions of all the requirements, documents, manuals, checklists and hundreds of answers to ‘Frequently Asked Questions ’, regarding all  the benefits offered  by the WBAS  (the GMI included) , should improve the overall level of the services provided   GMI beneficiaries have the right to appeal for a series of reasons (within 60 days after receiving a notification about the d ecision to which they appeal). These include, inter alia, the following: the rejection of their application for the GMI; the termination of their right to access the GMI; the amount of the GMI -related allowan ce; the provision of housing; or the decision stating that they or any of their family members are intentionally unemployed. To substantiate their appeal, GMI beneficiaries need to submit the necessary supporting documents. Next, the Deputy Minister of Soc ial Welfare (or the people  to whom it delegates  authority  to decide on the appeal ) will reach a relevant decision (normally within three months after receiving the appeal).  As far as disability is concerned, the GMI legislation clearly specifies the term ‘disability ’. Disabilities are evaluated by a Medical Board.  COVID -19-related changes: A relatively recent note of the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance  (dated 26 November 2020) refers to the labour market reintegration of long -term unemployed  people,  and especially of GMI beneficiaries, who are able to work, as one of the key means to cope with the consequences of the pandemic. This  attitude towards GMI  beneficiaries should be viewed alongside  the series of measures  taken to alleviate the consequences of the crisis triggered by the pandemic.  An example is the reduction and/or freezing  of housing rents for a limited period of time, in order to reduce  the burden of housing costs. A s a result, all tenants are eligible for a rent reduction, on the condition that landlords accept tax credits (granted if they agree to reduce the rent by 30 -50% for a specific number of months)  (Baptista et al ., 2021: 82) .  1.2  Coverage  The Cypriot GMI is a non -categorical (i.e. universal) natio nal scheme  offering, in principle, rel atively comprehensive coverage  – although there  are certain population groups, whoare either explicitly excluded , such as undocumented migrants,  or partly Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  covered, such as third -country nationals (who are eligible, if they fulfil residence -related criteria). Furthermore, after taking into account the ratio of actual beneficiaries to the total number of people  living in poverty or severe poverty , as an indicator of the relative diffusion of GMI -relate d benefits (and ther eby of the  coverage or inclusiveness  of the scheme ), the available data indicate  the relative high coverage offered by the Cypriot  scheme for severe poverty and its  good performance in terms of  poverty  alleviation.  (Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021: 17) . Broadly speaking, the criteria utili zed to determine the population covered by the GMI are predictable and transparent. The same holds true for the methods u sed to determine the foregoing population . Furthermore, both the criteria and methods utili zed in C yprus  conform with the international practice  on the issue. The determination of need is based on the financial resources of applicants  and on the current level s of the minimum subsistence basket and housing. The amount of minimum resources allocated under  the GMI is decided after considering  the amount of the minimum living needs of applicants  and their  family  units . To this end, the competent authorities have taken into account  the relevant studies and calculations of experts on these subjects.  Please no te that  in 2018,  2019  and 2020, low -income pensioners , who  chose not to apply in 2014  for a GMI,  were given the right to apply. Non-take -up is a typical problem of means -tested social transfers , which plagues  many European countries’ systems . There is a lack of studies rigorously examining issues of non -take -up in Cyprus. Broadly speaking, there are no data available on the complexity of the system and the ensuing bureaucracy surrounding it, aside from the data included in sections of this report. Fu rthermore, there are essentially no data on the effects of the aforementioned variables on the take -up of the scheme. Similarly, there are no scientific studies addressing these issues in particular.  The complexity of the system and the ensuing bureaucrac y surrounding it may  arguably  deter , however,  a number of ill -informed and/or low -educated  people  from comprehending , and therefore pursuing , their rights to income support  (Koutsampelas, 2016: 16) . On the other hand, the relatively high coverage rate of t he scheme may be regarded as implicit evidence of a satisfactory take -up rate (Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021: 9).  Simplifying  the application procedure and improving the communication between GMI applicants and the national authority in charge of the sche me may increase the take -up rate.  1.3  Adequacy  Following Nelson’s (2013 : 391 ) definition of minimum income adequacy  (minimum income benefits for a given household as a percentage of  the country’s equival ised median income ), the adequacy of  the Cypriot scheme is similar to that of  other EU member states (equal to 40% for a single adult , based on a median equival ized net income in 2018 of  €15,336).  Similarly , based on 2020  data  from the OECD database on the adequacy of GMI  benefits  for Cyprus , the relevant indicator (i.e. the GMI amount as a percentage of the median disposable income) for jobless people  without children  and two children equalled 31% and 29%, respectively10 (46% and 43%  if housing benefits are included ). The generosity of the C ypriot scheme, defined  as a percentage  of median income, is also reported to equal 44 % (Coady et al ., 2021: 19).  Moreover, a s mentioned in a previous section , according to a 2013  ex ante  impact assessment of the GMI  and  a subsequent micro -simulation exercise, the new scheme was found to be clearly more effective and comprehensive than the previous system. Despite criticism and a ssuming full take -up, the GMI was found to be capable of  almost eliminat ing absolute poverty  and significantly re duc ing relative poverty  (Pashardes, Koutsampelas and Polycarpou, 2013; Pashardes and Koutsampelas, 2016;  10 See: https://stats.oecd.org/viewhtml.aspx?datasetcode=IA&lang=en .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  European Commission, 2019; Chrysostomou and Andreou, 2017; Koutsampelas, Andreou and Tsolaki, 2019).  In addition, as noted  in previou s sections , the GMI -related benefit is differential ,  varying  according to applicants ’ income and family composition (i.e. the number of dependent people ). Special needs (e. g. housing costs/rent /interest on loan ) are also taken into account.  Household s are defined as the heads of households and any household members who are dependants . When it comes to family composition , the level of the GMI -related benefit is affected by the number and age of dependent people  (spouse s and children) in the household. It is , moreover , affected by instance s of co-habitation  with people  other than members of the family unit.   The basic amount for the GMI -related benefit is , as already mentioned,  set at €480 monthly (single person) and increases with the size of the recipient unit (i.e. by 50%, or €240, for each additional adult and by 30%, or €144, for each additional child  under  14).  For example, for a couple with one child under  14, the basic monthly income would be €864. If  the m onthly family income was  €500, then a GMI payment of €364 per month would bring total income up to the GMI for this family unit.   Hence, based on an  at-risk -of-poverty threshold (60% of the median equival ized income ) for a single person of €835.16 per month (€10,022 per year ) in 2020 , the basic monthly GMI -related benefit was  57.47% of the threshold. In  the case of a couple with two children  under  14, the at -risk -of-poverty threshold for the same year was  €1,753. 90 per month (€21,047  per year)11, and  the basic monthly GMI -related benefit of €1,008  was  57.5% of the threshold.  Additionally,  a comparison of the basic GMI benefit with the minimum wage is not straightforward, as the legislation regarding the minimum wage in Cyprus cover ed, up until recently,  only certain non -unioni zed occupations (e.g. shop assistants, clerks, childcare workers, personal care workers, security guards, and cleaners)12. The  forthcoming introduction of a  minimum wage  of €950 in the count ry is expected, however, to make the basic GMI amount equal to almost half the aforementioned wage.  Moreover , although there is no clear definition of people on low incomes used for the delivery of several services in Cyprus  (e.g. water, sanitation, energ y, public transport, and digital services), eligibility for the GMI is one of the most common criteria for accessing support measures; meaning that being a GMI beneficiary provides access to different support measures  (Batista and Marlier, 2020: 32)  The m onthly amounts can be adjusted every two years, after taking into account the actual prices of items included in the reference budgets.  Following the review  of the data presented in a previous subsection , the competent authorities may decide to investigate  further the newly acquired information and re -adjust the amount  allocated to GMI beneficiaries and family units or to terminate the access of those who are found not be eligible anymore for the GMI. If the data provided by GMI recipients and family units remain the same, the amount s allocated do not change.  Last, as discussed in more detail in the following sub -section , GMI beneficiaries typically have access to a series of benefits, such as housing benefits (rent support  or loan interest payment ), othe r care support, health support , and access to VET  programmes. Taking into account the above, the GMI in Cyprus is found to be characteri zed by a relatively  satisfactory level of adequacy, as reflected in the scheme’s performance in reducing severe pove rty, among other things.   11 See: https://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=ilc_li01&lang= en. 12 See : https://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=&p_isn=66696 .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  1.4  Links with other benefits  In accordance with the relevant legislation, a housing allowance is granted , when GMI beneficiaries live in either a rented property or in an owned property for which they pay  mortgage interest. The level  of the housing allowance is calculated , after taking into account the composition of the family unit/family size and the district of residence. More specifically, the estimated area of residence is as follows: 55 m² for single people  or couples ; an additi onal 25 m² for GMI applicants staying with a disabled person , or, in the case of dependants , one minor, two minors of the same sex and/or an adult child;  and  an additional 20 m² for every two  additional minors of the same sex and/or for every additional ch ild.  As already mentioned in a previous section, i n 2019, the housing allowance was re -assessed and substantially increased. The amounts of the housing allowance granted for each district of residence are as follows: Nicosia , €4.06/m²;  Limassol , €4.41/m²;  Famagusta , €2.94/m²;  Larnaca , €3.50/m²; and  Paphos , €2.94/m².   Additionally, GMI beneficiaries may be provided with care services. Should a person  apply for  care, her/his  needs  will be assessed by the Social Welfare Services and, depending on them , she/he will receive the corresponding care. The c are provided includes various care services , such as home care, institutional care, daycare , respite care, childcare and protection (even  incontinence pants where required ) (see e.g .: Koutsampelas, 2016 ; Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021) . More specifically, a  'baby dowry package' is, inter alia, provided to GMI recipients. This package includes basic consumer goods, such as equipment, linen, baby diapers and personal hygiene and baby care items. It is a measure  action co -financed by  the European Structural and Investment Funds . GMI beneficiaries are also entitled to  free access to emergency medical services , and  care and assistance schemes, in the form of cash or services for care and assistance (as required) , as well as to various VET  programmes.  2 Link s with labour market activation  Overall, although the activation component of the scheme seems , at least up until  the very recent past,  to have been less developed than the other  two GMI components (Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021:7) , during the last 2-3 years there has been significant progress. Progress largely concerns the development of the ‘Social Intervention Mechanism ’ which, among other things, provides for the institutiona l link with the PES  and thus for the activation of the able -to-work beneficiaries.  As a result, the vast majority of GMI beneficiaries are currently persons who are not able to work (disabled, pensioners and chronically severely ill persons). This outcome  is due to the coordinated efforts and services provided to beneficiaries, enabling their exit to work through dozens of complementary schemes and other policies..   According to the data  provided by the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance , there was a substantial increase  in the activation of GMI beneficiaries. In coordination with the PES , the GMI beneficiaries who are able to work are given priority in the matching performed by PES officer s with suitable jobs. As a result,  the number of GMI recipients who  are able to work and  need to be activated amounts to only  6% (compared to  the initial 30% ).  Based on the relevant legislation , GMI recipients  must : register with the PES;  accept any suitable jobs13 offered; not quit a job ; and particip ate in (where available) VET   13 In theory, this means a job that people  are able to do, after taking into account their  skills and level of education. In practice, however, especially during periods of higher unemployment, it is doubtful whether this rule is taken into account.  