Summary  The Cypriot Guaranteed Minimum Income ( henceforth GMI  - Ελάχιστο  Εγγυημένο  Εισόδημα  – ΕΕΕ ) scheme was introduced in 2014. It aims to ensure a socially acceptable minimum standard of living for persons (and families) , legally residing in the Republic of Cyprus , whose income and other economic resources are in sufficient to meet their basic and special needs.  The GMI is provided in the for m of monetary support and/or services.  The adoption of the GMI  was  linked to the ‘Memorandum  of Understanding’  (henceforth MoU) , which  was signed by the Cypriot government  and its international lenders   (the so -called ‘troika ’)(Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021: 5 -6). Due to  the constraints set in place in the MoU, the implementation of the scheme required more time . For example, the staffing of the new ly created  service (the ‘Welfare Benefits Administration Authority ’ – henceforth WBAS) for the administration of the GMI (as well as of all other welfare benefits)  started since adoption of the scheme with the recruitment of a permanent Director for the first time only since November 2021 . The afore mentioned conditions resulted into the ‘phased’ introduction of  this major reform . More specifically , the GMI, along with all its complementary components and associated policies, was gradually rolled out between the years 2014 and 2019. Long -term care services , for example, , in their current comprehensive form, which distinguis hes between institutional and home care and between disabled persons’ needs and old age social care needs , had initially been introduced in 2016 . Only in 2019 they  would be  fully developed , however . The  GMI is a means -tested benefit , using a combination of income and asset eligibility criteria , and is available to all households, whose incomes fall below a specified  ‘minimum income threshold’. Benefit levels reflect both ‘means’ and ‘needs’. Household ‘means ’ are based on all the income available to the household, so as to finance basic consumption (including other social benefits); while ‘needs ’ reflect the cost of attaining a minimum standard of living for all household members, and therefore vary with  household size and composition.  The level of basic needs support is estimated, after taking into account a minimum consumption basket. Work incentives are maintained through a combination of work disregard and mandatory participation in Active Labour Mar ket Policies (henceforth ALMPs).    That being said, the scheme consists of three pillars: income support, access to services and activation. The first GMI pillar  is based on a monthly cash benefit, which is defined as the difference between the actual income of the recipient unit and a pre -specified basic amount, corresponding to the minimum standard of living accepted by society.   The second and third pi llars of the scheme provide access to subsidi zed or fre e-of-charge services , deemed to be necessary for preventing material deprivation and activating recipients. These  include : healthcare ; psychological and career advice services ; vocational , educational and training  (henceforth VET) programmes  ; and , in the case of reci pients with dependants, subsidi zed childcare  and long -term care  (see e.g. Koutsampelas, 2016) .  Broadly speaking , the C ypriot GMI is characteri zed by a modern and relatively comprehensive design, which is targeted at addressing poverty and social exclusion , through the integration of the above mentioned three components . Monetary support , access to services, and assistance in entering/re -entering th e labour market  are regarded as being mutually reinforcing . The scheme is therefore designed to provide , in principle, holistic protection  to members of vulnerable groups .  While examining the scenarios of a minimum income support scheme Pashardes, Koutsam pelas and Polycarpou (2013) found that the scheme in place prior to reforms  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  would have been able to remove ‘absolute poverty’ and reducing ‘relative poverty’ by extending coverage to the ‘working poor’. Furthermore, although , up until recently , the data av ailable did not allow us to have a clear picture of the activation component of the GMI (see e.g. Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021), which seemed to be less developed than the other two pillars of the scheme, the Ministry interviewed for this study informed about  significant progress in this respect  since 2020 . This p rogress was largely linked to the  development of the so-called ‘ Social Intervention Mechanism ’ which, among other things, provides for the institutional link with the Public Employment Services ( henceforth PES) and thus for the activation of the able -to-work GMI beneficiaries. As a result, the vast majority of GMI beneficiaries are currently persons who are not able to work (disabled, pensioners and chronically severely ill persons). This outcome is due to the coordinated efforts and services provided to GMI beneficiaries, which enabl e their exit to work through dozens of complementary and linked services and policies.  Based on the data  provided by the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance , over the course of the last years there has been  a substantial increase  in the activation of GMI beneficiaries. In coordination with the PES, GMI beneficiaries who are able to work are given priorit y in the matching performed by the PES officers with suitable jobs. Moreover, since 2018, the PES hired 30 labour market specialists to assist with the activation (and re -activation) of GMI beneficiaries. .   Last, it should be noted that the number of fami ly units receiving the GMI has been constantly decreasing since 2017, when it was at its maximum (appx. 27,550 family units). This decrease is largely associated with the implementation of effective labour activation measures, as the one mentioned above; b ut also with increased job availability and improved eligibility control methods.  In summary , since 2019 (and especially 2021 ) the Cypriot scheme seems to have been more successful in attain ing its declared objectives , including the labour market activation of GMI ben eficiaries   Furthermore, i n an attempt to address the various concerns faced by GMI applicants regarding the  need for  communication with WBAS  officers, the Service  has a series of actions planned.  Besides  the request to obtain additional personnel , so as to be able to offer customer service points to GMI applicants and beneficiaries, the WBAS is in the process of re -examining the documents required by GMI  applicants . This is part of  the effort to simplify the application process and minimi ze the number of the paperwork needed. A new call centre is also in the final stage of being  set up by the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance . The new centre  will enhance communication between GMI  applicants / beneficiaries  and the Ministry  in charge .  Finally,  the online application  system that is currently being developed will enhance the transparency  of the system .  The following sections, first, outline the features of the Minimum Income (henceforth) MI support in place; secondly, they describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider the adequacy of the financial support provided and links with other benefits; thirdly, they examine the extent of integration with l abour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, they consider the access provided for GMI beneficiaries  to social services; fifthly, they summari ze the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, they review the evidence on the i mpact upon reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well  as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicate s the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3   1 