Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  1.4  Links with other benefits  In accordance with the relevant legislation, a housing allowance is granted , when GMI beneficiaries live in either a rented property or in an owned property for which they pay  mortgage interest. The level  of the housing allowance is calculated , after taking into account the composition of the family unit/family size and the district of residence. More specifically, the estimated area of residence is as follows: 55 m² for single people  or couples ; an additi onal 25 m² for GMI applicants staying with a disabled person , or, in the case of dependants , one minor, two minors of the same sex and/or an adult child;  and  an additional 20 m² for every two  additional minors of the same sex and/or for every additional ch ild.  As already mentioned in a previous section, i n 2019, the housing allowance was re -assessed and substantially increased. The amounts of the housing allowance granted for each district of residence are as follows: Nicosia , €4.06/m²;  Limassol , €4.41/m²;  Famagusta , €2.94/m²;  Larnaca , €3.50/m²; and  Paphos , €2.94/m².   Additionally, GMI beneficiaries may be provided with care services. Should a person  apply for  care, her/his  needs  will be assessed by the Social Welfare Services and, depending on them , she/he will receive the corresponding care. The c are provided includes various care services , such as home care, institutional care, daycare , respite care, childcare and protection (even  incontinence pants where required ) (see e.g .: Koutsampelas, 2016 ; Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021) . More specifically, a  'baby dowry package' is, inter alia, provided to GMI recipients. This package includes basic consumer goods, such as equipment, linen, baby diapers and personal hygiene and baby care items. It is a measure  action co -financed by  the European Structural and Investment Funds . GMI beneficiaries are also entitled to  free access to emergency medical services , and  care and assistance schemes, in the form of cash or services for care and assistance (as required) , as well as to various VET  programmes.  2 Link s with labour market activation  Overall, although the activation component of the scheme seems , at least up until  the very recent past,  to have been less developed than the other  two GMI components (Lalioti and Koutsampelas, 2021:7) , during the last 2-3 years there has been significant progress. Progress largely concerns the development of the ‘Social Intervention Mechanism ’ which, among other things, provides for the institutiona l link with the PES  and thus for the activation of the able -to-work beneficiaries.  As a result, the vast majority of GMI beneficiaries are currently persons who are not able to work (disabled, pensioners and chronically severely ill persons). This outcome  is due to the coordinated efforts and services provided to beneficiaries, enabling their exit to work through dozens of complementary schemes and other policies..   According to the data  provided by the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance , there was a substantial increase  in the activation of GMI beneficiaries. In coordination with the PES , the GMI beneficiaries who are able to work are given priority in the matching performed by PES officer s with suitable jobs. As a result,  the number of GMI recipients who  are able to work and  need to be activated amounts to only  6% (compared to  the initial 30% ).  Based on the relevant legislation , GMI recipients  must : register with the PES;  accept any suitable jobs13 offered; not quit a job ; and particip ate in (where available) VET   13 In theory, this means a job that people  are able to do, after taking into account their  skills and level of education. In practice, however, especially during periods of higher unemployment, it is doubtful whether this rule is taken into account.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  programme s, communal service, personal/social development  seminars , and  personal tutoring from PES counsellors . Failure  to do any of  the above  (for example, if people are found to be intentionally unemployed , or refuse  to accep t a job offer that is relevant to their  skills) may  result in temporary or complete loss of entitlement. No exemption seems to have been introduced during the pandemic.   If GMI beneficiaries are offered legal employment after being approve d for the scheme, but their salary is less than what they receive fr om the GMI, they are still entitled to continue receiving the GMI -related benefits; these  are re-calculated , however, according to their earnings and social insurance contributions.  People who are already in work are eligible to participate in the GMI, but  must register with the PES as employees who are seeking a job with an income that will be able to provide them with a decent standard of living.  GMI beneficiaries will continue to receive the GMI as a supplement to their families’ income, in addition to t heir salary, if their salary is below the total they are already receiving under the GMI.  Moreover , all employers must register their employees to the Social Insurance Services. The WBAS receives directly all information concerning the employment situation  and the contribution history of employees through a data connection with the Social Insurance Services.  Moreover, if GMI beneficiaries do not register with the PES and do not provide the necessary explanations to the WBAS , the payment of the GMI -related benefit will be terminated  (after careful examination , however) . Furthermore , due to  an amendment to the GMI -related law (in 2020 ),  access to  the GMI cannot be  terminated, without first contacting the applicant and asking the reasons why she/he or a member of the family unit did not accept a job offered to her /him , is not registered with PES , or resigned from a job. Until a decision is reached, access to the GMI  is temporarily suspended. Once a decision is made, and upon the condition that the reasons provided by the applicant are accepted , then the benefit is paid retroactively . When participating in ALMPs, GMI recipients continue to receive full GMI -related ben efits. P ersonali zed employment agreement s include, inter alia, details on the most adequate policies for GMI recipients.  Moreover, as already mentioned in another section,  the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance has recently hired 30 recruiters, who a re focusing specifically on the needs of GMI beneficiaries. Part of the ir tasks is carrying out  personal interviews with GMI beneficiaries and directing them to ALMPs, based on the specific needs  of these beneficiaries .  According to the 14th National Repo rt on the implementation of the European Social Charter in Cyprus14 (Government of Cyprus, 2020): “ for effectively addressing challenges and disparities in employment, especially for vulnerable groups, the Department of Labour of the Ministry of Labour, We lfare and Social Insurance promotes the [….] provision of personali zed employment services, especially to persons who belong in vulnerable groups, such as GMI (Guaranteed Minimum Income) recipients, ….. To strengthen the ability of the PES to offer high qu ality services, 30 additional Employment Counsellors have been hired since June 2018 for a period of 24 months and placed in PES offices in all Cyprus districts. These Counsellors will mainly provide personali zed employment services to people who belong to  vulnerable groups ”. These personali zed employment services include vocational guidance and referrals to training programmes. Access to ALMPs is, broadly speaking, both a right and an obligation of GMI recipients.  Although the 2020 European Commission Reco mmendation for a Council Recommendation on the 2020 National Reform Programme of Cyprus (which included   14 The most recent (15th) National Report on the implementation of the European Social Charter in Cyprus includes no reference to the GMI and the related services. See: https://rm.coe.int/rap -cha -cyp -15-2021/1680a17358 .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  15  delivering a Council opinion on the 2020 Stability Programme of Cyprus ) refer red, inter alia, to the need to improve PES in the country, according to other sources (see the discussion below) Cyprus has put considerable effort into improving all aspects of its ALMPs; and GMI recipients are encouraged to participate  in the relevant prog rammes. The authorities are also reported to have started implementing a system of continuous monitoring and evaluation of ALMPs (since the end of 2015 / beginning of 2016). Not all of these government initiatives have proved to be successful, but their ov erall impact is regarded as positive (see e.g. Cyprus National Reform Programme 2015).  Nevertheless, precise evaluation of the individual effectiveness  of these initiatives  is not an easy task. This is due to the fact that the ALMPs  implemented vary consi derably in scope, design, coverage, duration, and cost; which means that each programme should be evaluated separately, through customi zed assessment tools (Christofides and Koutsampelas, 2019) . This data should all be viewed in conjunction with the progre ss made by the Cypriot state on the implementation of the European Social Charter, as this progress is outlined in the relevant document (Government of Cyprus, 2020).  Examples of ALMPs targeted at  GMI recipients include the following15: programmes for gaining work experience (for unemployed people  with tertiary qualifications ); programmes for gaining work experience (for unemployed people  with secondary -level or post -secondary non -tertiary qualifications ); programmes for subsidi zing the recruitment of unem ployed people ; programmes for the development of labour market skills; programmes for subsidi zing flexible forms of employment; schemes for providing incentives (wage subsidies, on -the-job training, subsidi zing of training programmes) for the training and recruitment of unemployed people  in dynamic sectors of the economy, such as the tourist industry ; and programmes for subsidi zing the employment of people  with disabilities.  Additionally, e xamples of programmes explicitly designed in recent years for GMI recipients have included the ‘ scheme  for providing incentives for the recruitment of GMI recipients, in combination with three months training’, and the ‘ scheme  for the placement of GMI recipients in the (wide) public sector for acquiring work experience’16. The first targeted 850 GMI recipients with a total budget of €0.4 million.  The second scheme targeted 2,000 GMI recipients. The Department of Labour at the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance  also promotes, on a regular basis, an ‘incentive scheme fo r the employment of recipients of GMI’, in conjunction with the completion of three months practical training (Government of Cyprus, 2020) .   VET programmes are also usually organi zed by the HRDA, the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance or other public  authorities, with or without the participation of the private sector. These programmes are typically co -funded by EU structural funds and are usually well organi zed. Moreover, b ased on the sustainable development goals for Cyprus, as described in the Seco nd Voluntary National Review (Republic of Cyprus, 2021), during the period 2016 -2020 seven 'wage subsidies schemes'  were implemented. These schemes were aimed at helping employers to hire unemployed people . The schemes were addressed to the needs of those unemployed people aged over 50 , disabled  people , and  those suffering from chronic diseases, including GMI recipients.   15 This and the nex t paragraph are mainly based on Koutsampelas and Pashardes, 2015: 18 -19.  In other cases, the source is mentioned.  16 This and the next t hree  paragraph s are mainly based on Christofides and Koutsampelas, 2019.  In other cases, the source is mentioned. See also: http://www.mlsi.gov.cy/mlsi/dl/dl.nsf/All/E01716AC054E2322C22581CB00412589?OpenDocument .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  16  A relatively recent HRDA study was designed to evaluate the impact of the participation of GMI beneficiaries in a scheme for ‘their job pl acement to acquire work experience in the public and broader public sector’17. The scheme was aimed at providing work experience opportunities to GMI beneficiaries able to work, so as  to improve their employability and help them to re -enter the labour mark et (through their placement in public sector services/organisations, including local government authorities and NGOs).  The study population was 440 GMI beneficiaries, and the data were collected by using two appropriately designed questionnaires. The stud y indicated that more than one (1) in four ( 4) participants (27.7%) were employed at the time of the field research, about 13 months after completing their participation in the aforementioned scheme.  A total of 62.9% of the employed participants worked in middle -level occupations, with the highest per centages in service jobs. The average gross monthly salary of the employed participants was €880.  Almost six ( 6) out of 10 participants (57.6%) were in full-time and permanent employment.  Fewer than one ( 1) in 10 (9.2%) participants , who were either unemployed or inactive , found employment for a specific period after the completion of their participation in the scheme. The main reason reported for being unemployed was the ‘difficulties in finding any kind of  job’ (45.2%), and the main reason for being inactive was ‘personal reasons/personal commitments’ (85.9%). More than eight ( 8) out of 10 participants (81.0%) evaluated as very good or good the degree of utili zation of the knowledge and skills acquired (45. 9% and 35.1% respectively). More than six ( 6) out of 10 (61.9%) considered that their participation in the scheme has improved their employment prospects. More than eight ( 8) out of 10 (82.7%) were either very satisfied or satisfied with the scheme. A tota l of 76.0% were also very satisfied or satisfied by their co -operation with the HRDA and 76.1% were either very satisfied or satisfied by their co -operation with the WBAS . The HRDA has also been in charge of schemes targeted at the labour market integratio n of GMI recipients in the private sector of the economy. These schemes offer practical training and work experience opportunities to GMI recipients, in order to improve their employability and prepare their employment in a specific private sector enterpri se/organi zation. They combine three (3) months of training and 12 months of employment (Government of Cyprus, 2020).  Aside from  measures to promote the inclusion of GMI recipients in the labour market, it is arguably  important , however,  to safeguard the incentives  of beneficiaries  to take up and remain in work. To this end,  as discussed in a previous section,  a system for the exe mption of earnings under GMI  means -testing was designed that is more generous than the previous public assistance  system . The earnings disregard mechanism reduces the penali zation  of work, although it does not eliminate it. It does not reduce penali zation  very much for household  heads/spouses, whereas  it does so most generously for any working ‘children’  under the age of 28.  Mor e specifically, incentives to take up work through the earnings disregard are lower for household heads/spouses  and much higher for co-habiting  adult children . Additionally, as also discussed in a previous section, s etting the age cut -off at 28 may provide  work disincentives (arising from sharing adult children’s income) for the head/spous e and other adult children. T hese disincentives  last longer and are more likely to affect labour supply , when the age cut -off is set at a higher  age (currently at 28).  Drawing on Coady et al . (2021 ), the strength of work disincentives inherent in GMI schemes can be seen by examining the participation tax rate (PTR)  and marginal  17 This and  the next t hree  paragraphs are based on HRDA (2018).    Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  17  effective tax rate (METR).  More specifically, the PTR  is calculated as the share of additional h ousehold income from moving into employment that is lost due to reductions in benefits and income taxation. The METR is calculated as the share of additional household income from an increase in earnings that is lost due to reductions in benefits and incom e taxation. In general, the PTR  and METR  will depend on household composition, the level of earnings, the generosity of GMI payments, the rate at which support is tapered, and the interaction with the tax system, and estimates can be especially sensitive t o the assumptions underpinning the estimation methodology, including the time horizon used and the size of the earnings increase considered. Based on data from the same source, in the case of Cyprus the average PTR and METR in 2017 was  respectively 56.5 % and 31.5 %. There  are no data on the overall strictness  of the Cypriot scheme (i.e.  a composite index of separate strictness indices , including the availability for activation policies, the expected occupational and geographical mobility  for employment, the frequency and evidence required of job -search activity, and reasons accepted for non -participation in activation measures and turning down job offers).  Based on Christofides and Koutsampelas  (2019 ), three (3)  out of four ( 4) GMI recipi ents are found not to be  fit for work (pensioners, people  with disabilities , and/or people  assessed as unfit for work by medical councils) . Excluding about 25% of them as being under age or in the army  gives  the number of recipients who may be able to work  (). At the same time, based on data from the Ministry of Labour and Social Assistance,  already mentioned in a previous section,  only 6% of the GMI recipients , who  are able to work , are currently out of work.  Yet, as mentioned  in Coady et al . (2021) GMI recipients in Cyprus are not required to submit documentation on job-search activity ; they must sign on with the Social Insurance Office at regular intervals, in order to continue to receive payment18.  Overall, t he emphasis placed under  the Cypriot GMI  scheme on work -related conditionalities and employment p rogrammes is arguably a sign of a commitment to  labour market integration.  3. Link s to social  services and integrated provision of targeted social services  Despite the relative absence of studies on client satisfaction and the difficulty of extracting informatio n from the authorities engaged in the social services  linked to the GMI, GMI recipients are , in principle,  entitled to a co mprehensive package of services;  and the GMI is integrated with  the social services provided. G iven the limitations placed on social policy resources by the continuing fiscal consolidation efforts , the level (if not the quality) of these services  have been also argued to be  satisfactory19 ). The a ssessme nt that provides access to services like care takes place whenever GMI applicants/beneficiaries make  a special request for services , or if they are  referred for a so-called ‘ social intervention ’ (during which a decision will be also reached on whether they  will get the G MI or lose access to it). As already mentioned in the previous section, i n cases where GMI applicants claim  to be incapable  of working, the competent authority refers them  for a medical examination or the kind of assistance  that will be foun d to be the most suitable for them  (within the framework of the social intervention ). The provision of care services under the GMI scheme  therefore follows a personali zed approach, in the  sense that the needs of the individual are evaluated by professional  teams of the Social Welfare S ervices, with a view to deciding  on the type, range , and duration of the services that are necessary for the person being considered. It might be the case that the evaluation of recipient needs is based on standardi zed  18 See the relevant GMI legislation included at the end of this report.  19 This and the next two paragraphs largely draw upon Koutsampelas and Pashardes, 2015  and the relevant GMI legislation.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  18  assessm ent tools, but any effort to provide individuali zed services demands a certain degree of discretion. .   GMI beneficiaries , inter alia,  get a subsidy aimed  at providing them with access to long -term care and childcare services . The providers of these servic es might be public, private or not -for-profit entities (see e.g. Koutsampelas, 2016) . For example, GMI beneficiaries may receive a monthly amount of up to €102 per child for the use of approved childcare facilities (i.e. daycare  centres for pre -school children, childminders  and daycare  centres for school -age children). The amount of the benefit cannot exceed  the actual childcare expenses incurred by parents. Furthermore, p eople with disabilities and elderly might be eligible for institutional or in house care.  All GMI beneficiaries are also entitled to an additional subsidy to cover for the cost of some municipal taxes. This subsidy is provided only after the taxes have been paid to the relevant authority, and on the condition th at any discount offered by the relevant authority has been claimed by the beneficiary. The municipal taxes that can be claimed under the above provisions are: sewerage  rates imposed by the sewerage  board based on the value of the property; garbage collecti on charges  by the local authorities;  and the  municipal tax for main place of residence (OECD, 2020: 23, 32).  Hence, as also exemplified  by the needs assessment of GMI beneficiaries with disabilities undertaken by the Department for the Social Inclusion of  the Disabled , operating  within  the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance, there is  a link between a  multi -dimensional  needs assessment  and the social inte gration of GMI beneficiaries . The Social Insurance Services play a key role in this respect. Based on the specific needs of each GMI beneficiary (and whether she/he faces a particular employment, family issue, etc) , these services will  proceed to contacting the relevant agency.  The s ocial integration of GMI beneficiaries likewise appears to be a highly  ranked priority of the Europe 2020 National Reform Programme  (Directorate General, European Programmes, Coordination and Development, 2020) . The s anctions applicable in case of non -adherence to individual ized agreements/plans for GMI  beneficiaries are discussed in  previous section s. Based on the communication with the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance, t he integrated provision of targeted social s ervices for GMI beneficiaries appears to be  one of the mai n strengths of the Cypriot scheme. Broadly speaking , however,  issue s such as the relatively  high degree of bureaucracy  may hinder members of groups deemed to be vulnerable (e.g. low-educated people ), alongside ill -informed GMI beneficiaries , from benefitin g from the GMI -related social services.  3 