Governance mechanisms  The design and implementation of the Cypriot GMI  takes place at the national level. Although there are cases  where local authorities and non -governmental organizations (henceforth NGOs ) may participate in organizing  various GMI -related initiatives, t he architecture of the scheme does not prioritize regional or local  features . The WBAS  is the key government agency in charge of the overall coordination , management , and delivery of the GMI i n Cyprus20. The roles played by the Social Welfare Service s, the newly established Deputy  Ministry of Social Welfare  and the PES are also important.  For example, t he Social Welfare Services contribute to the aim of the inclusion of recipien ts, by means of providing them social services.  Since the introduction of the GMI, the Social Welfare Services have become responsible for the application of Article  10 of the main GMI law, which refers explicitly to the care and special needs of rec ipients.    20 This and the next two paragraphs are based on Koursampelas and Pashardes, 2015 . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  19  Starting from 1 January 2022, the WBAS has been transferred from the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance to the new Deputy Ministry of Social Welfare. As a result, the GMI falls now under the jurisdiction of the aforementioned Deputy Ministry.  The Social  Welfare Services, which, as mentioned above, play a key role in the implementation of the GMI, have been likewise transferred to the Deputy Ministry of Social Welfare. At the swearing ceremony which took place in July 2021, Cyprus’s First Deputy Minister of Social Welfare, Anastasia Anthousi, mentioned, inter alia,  that the reorgani zation of the Department of Social Welfare Services and its transformation into a (Deputy) Ministry of Social Welfare falls within the large and multi -dimensional effort of the state to strengthen existing policies for the well -being of citizens and ensure social cohesion21.  The Department of Labour and the PES , on the other hand,  focus on reinforcing work incentives for GMI beneficiaries, by means of facilitating t he link between them and ALMPs.  Support for unemployed GMI beneficiaries is also provided by the Department for the Social Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities and the  HRDA . The role of the former is more focused on ALMPs especially designed for people  with special needs (e.g. a programme of subsidies for the employment of people  with disabilities, and a scheme for the vocational training of people  with disabilities).  The latter organi zes VET  programmes that are targeted at various groups, including long -term unemployed GMI beneficiaries . The Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance is the ministry responsi ble for monitoring the overall implementation of the scheme. This includes monitoring changes in the financial/employment status of GMI beneficiaries and collecting data on GMI recipients and expenditure  on the provision of the scheme . It should be noted t hat there are specific legal provisions about the types of information that authorities can or must collect from benefit claimants and recipients22.  A computeri zed social benefit register  is utili zed to collect information about the people  receiving state  benefits (the GMI included). This upgrade of the technological infrastructure , which  took place alongside the es tablishment of the GMI,  corrected a major weakness of the previou s system , in which many social welfare benefits were provided without the exchange of information between the va rious compartments  of government.  The data collected  relate  to the number and characteristics (age, sex, income, level of educational attainment, etc.) o f GMI applicants and beneficiaries, as well as their household composition, among other things  (see e.g. Stylianides, 2019 ).  More specifically, the information collected from benefit claimants , as part of the claiming and payment process , includes informa tion on their address, education, household resources (income and assets, including other cash and in -kind benefits), and nationality or residence status23. Additional i nformation, including data collected from other agencies or service providers, such as the PES , regards the following: labour market history; sources of personal or household income (including other social transfers); current and previous participation in social services, social integration and rehabilitation programmes; and current and prev ious participation in ALMPs.   It should be also noted that r ecently (in February 2020),  a Deputy Ministry of Research, Innovation and Digital Policy has been established , in order to co-ordinate  the exchange of data between government bodies and/or between public institutions . However , monitoring data, as with  evaluation findings, are not publicly available.   The WBAS in cooperation with the above mention ed body, is currently planning the electro nic submission of applications . The aim is  to speed up and facilitate the  21 See FinancialMirror, 2021 .  22 This information is based on an OECD questi onnaire.  23 The information included in this and the next three paragraphs is based on an OECD questionnaire .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  20  application process , while at the same time eliminating possible omissions by GMI  applicants.  Aside from using the data mentioned above for administering support payments, as well as  for administering the support provided by other agencies or service providers (e.g. PES),  the data collected are  used for monitoring and evaluation purposes. In the case of monitoring, performance indicators have been adopted (e.g. indicators measuring the poverty gap, poverty intensity, and severe material deprivation ).Monitoring takes place at the  national level. Monitoring reports are delivered on a yearly basis  and are solely for internal  use.  In the case of evaluation, th e competent authorities are interested in assessing the effectiveness or efficiency of benefit programmes, as well as  the effects of policy changes  (e.g. by comparing the outcomes o f claimants affected by a reform with  those not affected by the specific re form). Evaluations are carried out internally. As with  monitoring reports, evaluation reports are only for internal use.  Based on such an evaluation, for example, the GMI component for suppl ementing low -income pensioner s’ income was found to have reduced the poverty rate of pensioners by almost 50% between  2010 and  2016. Legislative changes are also carried out , on a continuous basis , in order to push this category of citizens over the poverty thre shold .  Broadly speaking , administrative data on monitoring and evaluation are not accessible to external researchers (universities, research institutes, think -tanks, etc.). This is due to a series of reasons: legal barriers (e.g. data protection), the lack of resources for prepar ing the data or administering data access, and t echnical barriers (e.g. no secure way of disseminating the data).  4 Impact of minimum income scheme  The Cypriot GMI is characteri zed by a modern and relatively comprehensive design, which provides , in principle, holistic protection . This is reflected in the good performance of the scheme in coping with poverty , and especially severe poverty, as well as in providing  access to a broad range of social services. Additionally, r esearch findings from the  impa ct assessment of the GMI indicate that the GMI is clearly more effective and comprehensive than the previous public assistance  system ; assuming full take -up the GMI has the potential to almost eliminate absolute poverty and significantly reduce relative po verty (Pashardes, Koutsampelas and Polycarpou, 2013;  Pashardes and Koutsampelas, 2016; European Commission, 2019).   Taking also into account the ratio of actual beneficiaries to the total number of people  living in poverty or severe poverty, as an indicato r of the relative diffusion of the GMI -related be nefits, the available data corroborate  the good performance of the Cypriot scheme, in terms of alleviating poverty  and particularly severe poverty .Broadly speaking, the GMI is not so much constructed with th e aim to address relative poverty. The  working poor are an exception and the introduction of the minimum wage in Cyprus and the link established (even in an indirect way) of the GMI with the foregoing wage will result into the better/more extended coverage  of the working poor by the scheme.  The main objectives of the GMI are to cope with the poverty gap, absolute poverty and material deprivation. In this respect,  the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance  has some published data, such as the ones on  severe  material deprivation  included in the table below.  Year  2015  2016  2017  2018  2019  2020  Cyprus  7,9 6,6 6,1 3,8 3,2 3,2 EU average  9,7 9,0 7,9 7,1 6,7 6,8   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  21  Despite the scant available information on take -up, the relatively high coverage rate of the Cypriot GMI may be deemed to be implicit evidence of a satisfactory take -up rate. In a similar vein, the Cypriot scheme is also characteri zed by a satisfactory leve l of adequacy ; and , given budgetary pressures and cuts, an informed guess would be that the quality of the services provided  is likewise satisfactory.  Although  the activation component of the GMI seems,  at least up until recently,  to have been less develo ped  than the other two pillars of the scheme , over the last two  to three  years there has  been significant progress.  That being said, t he emphasis placed by the Cypriot scheme on work -related conditionalities and employment programmes is  moreover a sign of a commitment  to the labour market transition of GMI beneficiaries.  Overall, Cyprus is one of the c ountries deemed to operate a comprehensive scheme (Coady et al ., 2021: 7)  and  the Cypriot GMI may be thought  to be relatively effective. This remark should be viewed in conjunction with the fact that increasing the coverage of the GMI scheme and reducing poverty in the country  appear to be political priorities  (see e.g. Republic of Cyprus, 2021) . Last,  our ability to have a more  complete picture about the GMI scheme’s performance is solely hampered by the relative lack of information on the wider effects of the GMI on the basis of indicators regarding the well -being of vulnerable groups, the crime rate at the national level, etc . Yet, the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance and other national authorities make an effort to collect more data towards this direction . Still, taking into account the ‘restrained’ sources available to the competent authorities, additional help from th e EU may be needed.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member Stat es’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  22  5 