Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  My Plan is generated by the c ase workers  in job centres  and sets out targets f or work and/or education, agreements and requirements for job search, ALMP offers, and activities that can improve the person’s physical, psychological, or social state of mind to enable them to participate in offers. It also contains other agreed measures , the status of current initiatives , and follow -up for previous measures. The job centre updates My Plan according to the person's current situation and needs , and it is digitally accessible to the individual concerned . Recipients of the integration benefit have a contract (under the Law on Integration ) that is accessible in My Plan.  MI recipients must participate in the agreed measures  and may be subject to sanctions for failing to adhere to employment -oriented measures . Sanctions are rarely applied in respect of social and health services.  The quality of casework depends on the working conditions of caseworkers . However, no official information is available on caseloads (see Dansk Socialrådgiverforening , 2020). The Asso ciation of Social Workers recommends 35 -55 cases for  job-ready social assistance recipients per social worker, 30 -50 for activity -ready social assistance recipients and education -ready education al assistance recipients, and 25 -45 for  activity -ready educati onal assistance recipients ( Dansk Socialrådgiverforening , 2021).  Table 1 shows the benefit composition and adequacy for different family types. For assessment of in -kind support , there is a lack of systematic surveys o f recipients’ perceptions of the socia l integration and employment measures. However, studies have shown positive employment effects of recipients’ meetings with front -line personnel  (social workers and job consultants) (Rosholm  et al., 2017; Andersen et al ., 2021).  2 Links with labour market ac tivation  The granting of social assistance is subject to claimants’ participation in an activation measure or any measure to improve their (or their partner’s) integration into the labour market  (e.g. taking part in a job -seeking course, work experience in  a company ). Students cannot apply. Those who cannot work due to incapacity are expected to participate in rehabilitation programmes. Payment of social assistance is suspended if the beneficiary or their  partner refuses, without sufficient reason, to participate in an activation measure or repeatedly fails to report to a job opportunity under the activation.  If a person receiving social assistance finds work and starts earning income, th at income is  deducted from the social assistance payments. The tap ering of benefits with income from work is set out in the regulation on Active Social Policy ( Declaration No 981 of 23rd September 2019). The social assistance benefit is tapered with income from work, less EUR 3.8 per hour. There are no direct statistics on how many social assistance recipients have their benefit tapered/reduced due to income from work , but it is possible to estimate from looking at those  who had ordinary waged hours of work during the benefit period. In 2019, 22.3% of social assistance re cipients (21  261 people) and 18.6% of education al assistance recipients (10  701 people) had ordinary hours of work and were thus subject to tapering.  Individuals who are not unemployed and have experienced other types of ‘social events ’, such as sickness or disability, may not be required to be available for work but must meet other requirements  (e.g. participation in rehabilitation activities ). Requirements are suspended in cases of disability.  In general, social assistance recipients continue to receive benefits when participating in ALMPs. There may be other benefits or supplements in certain instances. For example, people  on integration benefit will shift to an integration education benefit when they begin the ALMP.  Social assistance recipients are div ided into three groups. The 'job -ready' are those that are seen as being ready to provide for themselves within three months by taking Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  on an ordinary job. They must actively search for work and take up  job offers and activities directed towards work. They must register as job seekers, make a job search agreement, register job searches, and update their CV , etc. The 'activity -ready' are  those with problems of an academic, social or health character that demand extra support for a longer period than one year before they can start an education in ordinary conditions. They must participate in meetings at the job centre , as well as activation offers (e.g. bridge -building to education ). D ue consideration must be given to the person’s academic, social or health pro blems . Activity -ready recipients must accept offers of work adapted to the ir resources and needs , and they must participate in activation offers. The  ‘education -ready’ covers those that are ‘evidently -education -ready’ (åbenlyst uddannelsesparate)  and those  that are just ‘education -ready’. The evidently -education -ready are not seen as having any barriers to starting education , nor in need of  help and support, and they must be available for the labour market until they can start education. The ‘education -ready’ are those seen as able to start their  education within a year and to finish it on ordinary terms , with the right help and support . They  must be available for education in ordinary conditions and for measures aimed at education in ordinary conditions. All recipients of social assistance have the right and duty to take part in labour market activation. Municipalities are responsible for act ivation.  Education al assistance recipients are categorised as either 'evidently ready for education', 'educationally ready' or 'activity ready'. Those who are evidently ready for education are seen as having no barriers and so noneed for support to start a n education on ordinary conditions. They must be available to the labour market until they start an education. They must register as looking for jobs, enter a job search agreement, register, and update their CV, and participate in, for example, traineeship s. Those who are categorized as education -ready are seen as able to start and education on ordinary conditions after a year with the right support and active measures. They must be available for education and measures directed toward education.  In principle, all education assistance recipients are subject to activation, but the type of activation varies  according to the category of recipient . In 2019, those on full -time education al assistance categorised as ‘ready for education’  made up 0.5% of t he labour force aged 16 -66 years (0.4% were evidently ready and 0.0% education -ready) , while those categorised as activity -ready made up 0.7%. Those proportions were  unchanged in 2020 and 2021.  In 2020, 167  789 people received social assistance at least o nce. Calculated on a  full-time basis, th at equated to 114  855 recipients (3.9% of the labour force aged 16 -66 years , or 3.0% of the total population aged 16 -66 years ). There were 91  255 recipients of social assistance , the equivalent of 67 418 on a full -time basis  (2.3% of the labour force and 1.8% of total population ). Education al assistance had 58  595 recipients , equivalent to 34 996 on a full -time basis  (1.2% of the labour force or 0.9% of the population ). Similarly, the integration benefit had 17  939 recipients , equivalent to 12 441 on a full -time basis  (0.4% of the labour force  and  0.3% of the population ). Obligations and sanctions  Depending on whether MI recipients have been assessed as ready for  a job, education, or activation, they must meet a seri es of obligations. Those who can take up  an ordinary job within three months  are seen as job -ready and must search for and accept jobs. Those who cannot take up  an ordinary job within three months  are categorised as activity -ready and must search for and a ccept jobs adjusted to their capabilities. If people do not have an adequate level of education and are under  30, they are seen as ready for  work until the ir education starts. None of the MI benefits are conditional cash transfers.  In general , failure to f ulfil obligations relating  to MI benefits and employment services results in sanctions but these are not typically used for social and health services. Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  Sanctions include from benefit withdrawal, increased availability criteria, temporary benefit withdrawal , and fees. If recipients fail to show up at a meeting or an activation offer, they are likely to be first subject to a fee sanction, then a temporary benefit withdrawal , then other  sanction s. Failure to register as unemployed or to compile a CV typically result s in a temporary withdrawal of benefit.  In 2019, there were 104  257 sanctions , including 1  819 benefit suspensions  (about 0.6 sanctions per benefit participant, on average) . There were 37  881 sanctions  imposed  on social assistance recipient s, including 16  846 period sanctions for not participating in an ALMP offer . 893 people  had their benefit revoked. One in seven (14.9%) recipients of social assistance was sanctioned. In 2019, there were 45  576 sanctions on education al assistance recipient s, including 33  111 period sanctions for not participating in an offer . 1 497 persons had their benefit revoked. More than one in five (22.1%) recipients of education al assistance were  sanctioned during 2019. For integration benefit recipients, the re were 20 880 sanctions, including 429 benefit stops, and 16  818 temporary benefit suspensions. On average, each integration benefit recipient had 1.2 sanctions.  Nature of activation measures  Social assistance recipients participate in a broad range of ALMPs and complimentary services. ALMPs include traineeships, wage subsidies, supervision, training programmes , etc. For people experiencing problems in areas other than work, additional s ervices may be offered (see Section 3 ). Education al assistance recipients can also participate in a broad range of ALMPs and complimentary services. Those  categorised as activity -ready  are particularly targeted with measures that work as bridge -building into education.  In addition to  employment and social services , integration benefit recipients may be offered a so-called integration education benefit. In 2016, the social partners and the government undertook a tripartite agreement on integration , which was subsequently renewed. The i ntegration basic education (Integrationsgrunduddannelse, igu)  consists of placement in a company , with accompanying language, supervision and qualification courses. This type of extended traineeship in the private sector is considered the most effective in strument for  getting people into work.  Effects of ALMP s Several studies have been undertaken on the effects of ALMP s on education and work among  MI recipients  (Rosholm and Svarer , 2020). Wage subsidies in the private sector have the strongest employment ef fects , although w age subsidies in the public sector  have negative employment effects. Meetings have positive effects for those who are categorised as job -ready  and education -ready. There are indications that traineeships have positive employment effects , while mentors appear to work well for those categorised as not ready for work  or education.  The employment effects of activation measures for immigrants were reviewed recently (Jakobsen et al ., 2021). Traineeships, wage subsidies in the private sector, and employment in temp orary work  agencies show positive employment effects. Language programmes have positive effects in the long -term  (three -four  years), but not in the short -term . There are indications of positive employment effects for  wage subsidies in the public sector. Studies seem to show that a focus on sectors with labour shortages and skill  demands can be  particularly effective, especially for women of non -Western descent. Sector -oriented measures are typically composed of trainee ships , language and practical courses aimed at qualifying people for jobs in the sector.  Scope of activation  In 2019, there were 61  758 social assistance recipients activated , equivalent to 10 920 on a full -time basis (0.4% of the labour force aged 16 -66). On average, 15.4% of the social assistance recipients were in activation, 64.9% of them were in activation Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  15  at one or more stages during the year, and the activation intensity was 36.1% of the time possible.  There were 44  477 educational assistance recipie nts in activation , equivalent to 1 0 059 on a full -time basis  (0.4% of the labour force ). Similarly, 16  874 integration benefit recipients were activated , equivalent to 5  936 on a full -time basis  (0.3% of the labour force ). Unfortunately, the majority of MI  recipients do not make use of the most effective scheme  - traineeships in the private sector.  3 