Summary  The Danish system of minimum income (MI) benefits is made up of social assistance, supplementary cash benefits, and extensive employment measures and social integration services.  Social assistance encompasses three benefits, with 35 categories of recipient and 16 levels of benefit. In broad terms, it can be broken down as following:  • Social assistance (kontanthjælp) targets the no n-migrant population over 30 years of age;  • Educational assistance (uddannelseshjælp)  targets young people without an education;  • Self -sufficiency and return benefit, or transition benefit (selvforsørgelses - og hjemrejseydelse eller overgangsydelse) ), primar ily targets migrants.  Supplementary benefits linked to receipt of MI benefits include special housing benefit, help in special situations, bonus for learning Danish, and the temporary child allowance. Supplementary benefits not linked to MI receipt include  the child and youth allowance for all families, child allowances for all single -provider households, and the individual housing benefit for low -income groups.  The adequacy of MI benefits depends on individuals’ benefit category and eligibility for supplem entary benefits. Generally:  • Social assistance recipients receive more than recipients of educational assistance or the  self -sufficiency and return benefit (transition benefit).  • Single -provider households receive more than couples with provider responsibi lities (in part due to the child allowances).  • Young people living alone are assigned into one of 26 benefit categories with monthly benefits of between EUR 862 and EUR 2  090.  There are certain negative relationships between MI benefits and social integrati on measures. For example, if young on activity or diagnosis supplements progress from social integration measures, they will not only be categorised as ready for education or work but will also lose half of their benefit.  The system is not very effective i n getting people into work, as many MI recipients are exempt from the complex (29) benefit caps (kontanthjælpsloft) and the requirement to work 225 hours in the preceding 12 months to avoid benefit sanctions (timeregel). Together, the caps and work require ments are estimated to increase labour supply by only 450 people. The tapering of benefits to reflect work income is quite steep, providing a disincentive to work.  Extensive employment measures include traineeships, wage subsidies, and qualification programmes. Traineeships in the private sector are the most effective, while qualification programmes are used most frequently. Local delivery of employment measures and social integration services results in considerable variation across municipalities. Organisational, economic and disciplinary differences challenge the promising trends towards integrated services and holistic case management.  In May 2021, the Commission on the Minimum Income Benefit System (Ydelseskommissionen)  identified several major problems with the MI system. These included the complexity of the system, ineffective incentives to work and study, unequal treatment of recipients, and deprivation of chil dren in families receiving MI supports.  The Commission made a series of recommendations for a new minimum income benefit system, including:  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  • Introduction of one benefit at two levels;  • Positive economic incentives for study, work and personal development;  • Abolition of the 225 -hour work requirement, benefit ceiling, and special housing benefit;  • New Free Time Allowances earmarked children’s free time.  The government will announce its blueprint for a new minimum income benefit system in February 2022.  The follow ing sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of in tegration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on t he impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as we ll as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indica tes the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 