Governance mechanisms  Parliament decides on the legislative frameworks covering MI benefits  (social assistance, child allowances, and housing allowances ) and employment -oriented measures , as well as social and health services of a general and targeted natu re. The social assistance system is the scheme of last resort in Denmark. It consists of three benefits - social assistance, educational assistance, and the integration benefit , as well as supplementary benefits, including some benefits predicated on recei pt of social assistance and other s target ing low-income groups , or universal ly available . Access to employment measures, social services and health services are not dependent on MI recipient  status.  Regional authorities do not play a role in MI be nefits an d have only a small one in MI support schemes. The y run primary healthcare in the form of hospitals , which are important in the context of mental illness  (increasingly an issue among  MI recipients ).  At regional level, a  quasi -public organisation, PaymentD enmark, is responsible for the payment of non -discretionary cash benefits, including child allowances and housing allowances. PaymentDenmark is part of the ATP adm inistration and has five regional offices in Denmark. The ATP administration originally only administered the supplementary pension benefit , but has since taken on responsibility for administering more social security schemes in its PaymentDenmark section. The regional PaymentDenmark offices are not associated with regional authorities, but with the ATP.  Social assistance is administered at local level by 98 municipalities. The ir elected politicians decide on MI support schemes , such as employment measures and social integration services. The local administration often has a section on payment of benefits, including MI benefits, and other sections dealing with employment -oriented measures, typically job centres, and social and health services. Citizens with complex problems can have caseworkers across the administration, with some i ntroduc ing coordinating caseworkers or case  teams. The administration and granting of MI benefits is always within the realm of municipalities. The delivery of services can be undertaken  by both public and private bodies , depending on the type of service.  Some socia l services and employment services are delegated to private providers. For example, housing providers  include shelters  and  organisations offering interventions that include psychological, social, and practical support. Employment measures include training courses, mentor support, temp orary work  agencies , etc.  Services are delivered at local level, with regional level involvement in respect of certain health services , such as mental health and disability.  In 2020, municipalities employed  508  900 people , according to the Association of Local Government (Kommunernes Landsforening, KL) . This include d 156  400 doing educational work (including 51  400 teachers and 38  100 teaching  assistants) and Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  18  150  500 working with  older people, and people with health issues or d isability (101 700 worked with older people outside the MI benefit  scheme ). The stock and flow of social security recipients, including MI recipients, and employment -oriented measures is monitored by the Agency of the Labour Market and Employment (Styrelse n for Arbejdsmarked og Rekruttering, Star) . The agency has an online website where monthly data are  published2. Statistics are collected from many different sources, including municipalities and administration, Statistics Denmark, and other state authorit ies. Data are provided free of charge at the level of municipalities and job centres , allowing for comparisons across locations.  For employment measures, the Star website publishes monthly data on  so-called  Ministerial Goals , as well as on key indicators at different levels of government. Ministerial Goals vary over time. For 2021 there are three such goals : i) the share and number of benefit recipients that started a qualification programme ; ii) the share of companies that have tried and  failed to recruit workers; iii) the share of refugees and people reunited with their families who are in employment. There ar e three key indicators for j ob centres. The target measure is defined by the expected and actual number and share of people  on social security benefits  full-time . The focus indicator measures meetings and participation in active measures  (reported as numbe r and share of people ). In addition, there are indicators on unemployment and jobs.  The statistics on employment measures inform ranking lists and identify positive and negative outliers. Negative outliers typically get a letter from the Labour Market and Employment Agency offering its services to identify more effective policies.  Employment measures are monitored monthly. Both employment measures and social and health services are evaluated, in particular, when they pilot the use of new instruments.  Social  and health services are not monitored to the same extent , but it  is possible to find information on expenditure according to broad budget items , which are monitored.  Fraud is a  subject of interest at both local and central level , although there are no pub licly available data . At local level, caseworkers will stop benefits if fraud is detected , or they will make special conditionality requirements where  fraud is suspected. At central level, PaymentDenmark use s Big Data and machine learning to identify fraud ulent patterns, e.g. MI benefit recipients buying expensive cars or motorbikes.  The  right of appeal is underpinned by a legal framework. Applicant s who are not satisfied with the decision of a municipality in respect of their MI benefits must complain to t he municipality within four weeks of receiving t he decision. The municipality then re views that decision within four weeks. If it upholds the original decision, the complaint is referred to the National Board of Appeal.  5 