Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  MI recipients can be offered services beyond labour market activation. Integrated services (e.g. with social and employment -related components , or health and employment components ) are believed to be particularly effective for social assistance recipients , as a relatively weak group of unemployed compared to insured unemployed. A Law on Integrated Measures (Lov om helhedsorienterede indsatser)  is forthcoming in January 2023, having twice been postponed. In the meantime, municipalities are finding their own ways of offering joined -up services from different sectors.  Integration of MI  schemes with social services  Municipalities offer social services, including integrated targeted social services. As Denmark’s 98 the municipalities organise themselves, the scope and the measures vary considerably . Municipalities have an  obligation to or ganise meetings and propose offers to MI recipients with the objective of getting them into work or education in  the short or long er term. Social workers and job consultants meet recipients and  assess the ir social, economic, and educational situation.  MI r ecipients are assigned a social worker and , often , a job consultant. If they have family problems, they may also be in contact with welfare professionals. Vulnerable groups  may have their social and health needs addressed, alongside their lack of work or e ducation. Like all residents, MI recipients are entitled to universal benefits , independently of their status as MI recipients. For example, Denmark has a universal healthcare system with a guiding principle of equal access.  Assessments in a multidimension al framework  Vulnerable people  can apply to the municipality for support , independently of their MI status. They are invited to a meeting , accompanied by a relative or another person. There, they discuss the person’s needs, resources and goals, a nd collect the necessary documentation. Many municipalities use a version of the Adult Assessment Method 2.0 (Voksenudredningsmetode , VUM 2.0), while others have developed their own assessment framework s. The assessment systematically covers challenges and resources (physical and mental functionality, social and health aspects), everyday life (relations, community life, communication, practical tasks, own care, mobility), and contextual factors. Again, the approach is at the discretion of each municipality.  Assessments are based on information from a variety of sources, including general practitioners, workplaces, job  centres, teachers, parents, psychologists, and others. The caseworker only collects information with the applicant’s permission. Based on the assessment, the caseworker recommends the services that should be provided. These are described in a decision and accompanied by an individual action plan and a letter outlining the complaints procedure if t he desired services are  not granted. The caseworker  also makes a formal request to support services suppliers. Negative sanctions are rarely applied in respect of failure to engage with social and health measures.  Universal services with local variation  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  16  In addition to  the universal healthcare system, chil dcare system and long -term care system that help work -life balance , there are several targeted local services (although these vary widely and are often at municipal discretion) . Those with relatives who are terminally ill or who require substantial care ma y get relief through institutional care or home help. Pe ople with disabilities have access to personal care assistants, mobility aid, and more. MI recipient  status is not an eligibility condition for these universal or targeted services.  General services a re typically  universal and free -of-charge or subsidised, especially for people with low income s, including most MI recipients. Childcare is subsidised so that no family has  to pay more than 25% of the actual costs and many families pay less. Households with an annual income below EUR 24 973 have free childcare , while households with an annual income between  EUR 77 568 have a reduced rate. Households with an annual income higher than that threshold pay t he full fee, capped at 2 5% of actual costs.  Coverage  Data on coverage of social services and health services  are not disaggregated by social security recipient status. However, quarterly data on usage  are available from municipalities . For example, in the fourth quarter of 2020 , 48 046 people  were in receipt of one or more services under the Law on Active Social Services, compared to 42 770 in the first quarter of 2015, a 12% increase over the five -year period.  There are  data on the use of childcare, healthcare, and various general services. However, these data are not regularly available by social security status. For example, childcare data are available according to age of the child, type of childcare, municipality, fee s, and staff:child ratio , but not by income source of parents. The scope of daycare coverage declined  from 32  393 full -time children in 2018 to 31  002 in 2019 and  29 188 in 2020. Attendance at nurseries (children aged 0 -2 years) was stable , at 69 855 in 20 18, 70  817 in 2019 , and 69 793  in 2020. The use of childcare (3-5 years) increased  from 154  773 in 2018 to 156  643 in 2019 and 158  296 in 2020.  Generally, people make use of the services offered. Exceptions include episodes of mental ill health, or families that fear contact with the authorities will lead to placement of their children in foster care. Some of those in the groups  most in need of integrated services are also the most reluctant to tak e up offers.  Integrated provision of services and coordination  Integrated provision of services has proven to be effective in a wide range of situations, including for those suffering from mental illness, homeless  people , and families and pe ople  with compl ex problems. Integrated services  are often offered by different parts of the municipal administration (e.g. social section , employment section) or different levels of administration (e.g. social and employment matters are dealt with at municipal level , whi le hospital treatment for mental illness is at regional level). Barriers for collaboration can thus be economic , legal and professional. There is a push for greater use of integrated services, including for  homelessness , with joint use of housing, home sup port/Critical Time Intervention (CTI) and health offers. Attempts have also been made to promote integrated services for young people, encapsulated in the Municipalities Youth Measures  (KUI ) for the under -25s. Finally, a series of municipalities have used integrated services for young and vulnerable families in so -called free municipality projects. In 2019, a law on Holistic Oriented Measures ( Hovedlov om helhedsorienterede indsatser ) was adopted but will only be implemented in January 2023. The law seeks to facilitate holistic -oriented measures in integrated and coherent services.  Coordination between the providers at different stages  of a programme relies on a coordinating caseworker, a team of central caseworkers, schema on progression, use of shared  concepts and so forth. However, when providers are not directly linked to a programme, there may not be a bridge between different programmes , while the Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  17  General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)  poses difficulties for routine exchange of information . This  affects vulnerable groups most, as stronger groups  can more easily obtain and navigate the programmes on offer.  Integrated projects are often associated with a monitoring framework to divide costs and benefits and to ensure the availability of relevant in formation for all those  involved. This varies by project, but the GDPR and  citizens’ legal rights require individual permission for any exchange of personal information.  The biggest challenge in the provision of integrated services is the budgetary framewo rk, which does not always incentivise c ollaborat ion or long er-term projects (e.g. investment in people ). Additional challenges are administrative silos with differing agendas, and different disciplinary approaches ( Reformkommissionen , 2021).  4 