Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  Minimum income (M I) schemes available to the working -age population  The Danish MI support system consists of MI benefits - social assistance, child allowance s, and housing allowances - and employment -oriented measures , as well as general and tailored social and health services.  The Danish social assistance system (kontanthjælpssysteme t) is complex, offers unequal treatment of people in similar  situations, and is inefficient in getting recipients into education and work. In December 2019, the  government established  a Commission on the Minimum Income Benefit System to analyse the problem s. In May 2021, the Commission made recommendations for a  simpler, fairer, and more effective system. The government will announce its proposal for a new system of minimum income benefits in February 2022. This report sets out the existing system with its  widely acknowledged challenges.  The social assistance scheme is the scheme of last resort for  the working -age population. It consists of three benefits : social assistance, educational assistance , and the self-sufficiency and return benefit or transition b enefit ( ‘integration benefit’). These schemes distinguish between different categories of recipient , according to their age, education, employment record, health and pregnancy status, civil status, family status , etc. Following an assessment, recipients ar e categorised according to their ability to study and work. These categories, in turn, have implications for recipient benefit levels , and their right and obligations to participate in activation and social integration measures.  Some MI benefits are linked  to receipt of social assistance, while others are not. Social assistance recipients may be eligible for special housing allowance (særlig støtte) , help in special situations (hjælp i særlig e situationer ), bonus for learning Danish (Dansk bonus) , and the temporary child allowance (midlertidigt børnetillæg) . Social assistance recipients may also qualify for one or more of th e other MI benefits - child and youth allowances , child allowances,  and individual housing allowances  – that are not Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  predicated on receipt of social assistance. Access to employment measures, social services and health services are not dependent on being a MI recipient.  Benefit cap and work demand  Two special features were included in the  social assistance system  to increase incentives to work . The work demand (timeregel)  requires 225 hours of ordinary work in the preceding 12 months in order not to have  a reduced benefit. However, 85% of MI recipients are exempt from the work requirement . The benefit cap  (kontanthjælpsloft)  sets a ceiling on the amount of social assistance and supplementary benefits  that can be claimed . The temporary child allowance reduces the impact of the se two  special features , while com plexity in the design and implem entation of the work requirement and the benefit cap reduces their efficiency in getting MI recipients into work ( Ydelseskommissionen , 2021).  Expenditure  In 2020, the total expenditure on social assistance schemes amounted to EUR 1 912  199  080 , with social assistance a ccounting for 67.9% of spending. Education al assistance and the integration benefit amounted to  24.1% and 8.0% , respectively. N o statistical information is available on the administrative costs of MI benefits. Without administrative costs or support services , the expenditure on social assistance benefits amounted to 0.6% of GDP  in 2020.  Recipients  In 2020, 167  789 people  received benefits from the social assistance schemes at least once, equivalent to 114  855 recipients on a full -time receipt basis , which corresponds to the annual average stock. This amounted to 3.9% of the labour force aged 16 -66, or 3.0% of the total population aged 16 -66. The re were 91  255 recipients of social assistance in 2020 (equivalent to 67 418 on a full -time basis ), amounting to 2.3% of the labour force and 1.8% of total population. Education al assistance had 58  595 recipients (equ ivalent to 34  996 on a full-time basis ), amounting to 1.2% of the labour force  and  0.9% of the population. Similarly, the integration benefit had 17  939 recipients (12 441 on a full -time basis ), equal to 0.4% of the labour force or 0.3% of  the population.  Active labour market se rvices and social services  Denmark has very extensive employment measures and social services.  MI recipients have the right and an obligation to participate in activation and other measures. If MI recipients do not meet their activation obligations, they are likely to face a negative economic sanction, unlike social service offers, which incur no such sanction.  Challenges of the MI benefit system  The existing MI benefit system experiences several challenges. Its complex ity makes it difficult to navigate , both for MI recipients and  for front -facing  personnel. It also treats people in similar situations differently. In general, recipients of education al assistance and the integration benefit receive lower benefits than recipients of social assistance. Househ old composition also has an impact, with single providers sometimes receiving more in both absolute and relative terms than joint providers ( couples ). As a result, the economic situation of children in MI benefit families varies considerably . The lack of transparency of the benefit cap and the 225 -hour work requirement  - plus the exemption of a large number of recipients from both demands - makes work incentives ineffective. The link between the categorisation of recipients (ready for job, education , or activities) and benefit levels is counterproductive. Young people receiving a supplement for being activity ready or having certain listed psychiatric diagnos es will lose half of their benefit if they progress to ready for education or work , or if their diagnosis changes to one not on the list. This is a disincentive  for young people ’s participation in social, health and employment measures.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  Challenges of the MI support system  Similarly, t here are challenges associated with the MI support s, i.e. the services and measures provided in kind . Relatively successful schemes (e.g. Housing First, Individual Placement and Support (IPS)) have shown that integrated benefits can help homeless people an d those suffering from mental illness to move into housing and jobs. Housing First combines permanent housing with intensive home support (e.g. Critical Time Intervention and Intensive Case Management). IPS combines employment services with psychiatric ser vices.  The central idea is to integrate employment measures with social  or health services  (or both ), coordinated and in parallel , instead of sequentially. It is difficult  to translate this idea into practice , however . Municipalities have  the freedom to de cide how they deliver their employment and social services, while the vertical integration of health service provision is an issue in the regions. As municipalities are typically organised by sector ( education, family affairs, health, employment, housing ), cross -sectoral working presents a challenge, particularly the horizontal dimension of integrating services.  Recent changes  There have been three significant changes to MI schemes over the last five  years. The benefit cap and work requ irement were abolished in 2012, with the then -government reporting that they caused poverty among recipients. However, 2016  saw  the reintroduction of the benefit cap  and the 225 -hour work requirement , which the inc oming government argued were necessary inc entives to work. In 2019, the government established a Commission on the Minimum Income Benefit System to propose r eform s, including a  simpler, more just and efficient system. In the meantime, the government introduced a temporary child allowance  to compen sate for the benefit cap or for those on the relatively low integration benefit.  The Law on Active Social Policy was consolidated in 2019. Benefit levels are updated annually , but the t hresholds are not updated regularly. Most notably, the threshold for wealth and savings has not been updated since 1998.  The C OVID -19 pandemic has not had any consequences for MI  benefit schemes, but the lockdown in March 2020 led to a n increase in recipients, albeit lower than expected due to generous wage compensation schem es to support employers  to retain their staff . The temporary suspension of activation  measures during the two lockdowns also led to a small decrease in the number of activated MI recipients.  1.1  Eligibility  The scheme is open to all persons lawfully resident in Denmark that are in n eed of support.  A general condition for access ing social ass istance is some change in the person’s situation (social event or social contingency ) that means the person cannot provide for themselves and their family. The social contingency can be unemployment, illness, end of partnership, end of education, imprisonm ent of partner , and other predictable and non -predictable events.  The impact of that social contingency is means -test ed, as the eligibility criteria stipulate that the need for provision cannot be met by other means  (e.g. income from work, wealth, or anoth er social security benefit ). The  means  test exempts certain types of income and assets.  Income from work is deducted DKK to DKK (EUR to EUR ), except EUR 3.67 per working hour  for 160 hours per month. Those working  more than 160 hours per month are not elig ible for  social assistance.  No assistance is granted if the applicant or their  spouse has sufficient wealth to cover their financial needs, including real estate and savings above a certain amount. The Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  possibility of taking out a loan in equity to support the family  will be examined for homeowners . Sources of income excluded from the means test include: compensation for the loss of earning capacity and permanent injury; lump sum payments up to EUR 20 166 from insurance against certain critical illnesses; he althcare and special assistance concerning children; children's income and income relating  to children, except for grants for the care of their own children. In addition, savings  of up to EUR 1 344 for a single person (double for a married couple) a re not taken into account. People  with assets over these limits  are not eligible for  social assistance.  The entitlement to support is condition al on being available for work or education, or participation  in activation offers and meetings at the job centre . Failure to meet these conditions results in sanctions and total /partial loss of benefit.  Similarly, there is a work requirement of 225 hours of (ordinary) work in the preceding 12 months. Failure to meet  this requirement  may result in lower benefits or  the termination of benefit for one person in a couple. However, the majority of recipients are exempt from the work requirement because they are not assessed as job ready  (i.e. capable of taking up work immediately ). Eligibility criteria  for the three socia l assistance schemes  Eligibility criteria are used to determine  an individual’s benefit (social assistance, educational assistance, integration benefit) and category of recipient . The Commission on Minimum Income Benefit System (2021) noted that these crit eria were established through decades of political bargaining , resulting in a  complex and non -transparent  system . These eligibility criteria include age, education, employment record, residence record, health status, pregnancy, housing, civil status, and f amily situation , as well as assessment of recipients’ ability to study and work.  Social assistance  People  who fulfil the general eligibility criteria and who are over 30 years of age , with a residence record in Denmark (or another EU/EEA country) and a work record have access to social assistance. The residence requirement stipulates a minimum period of 9 of the last 10 years , while the work requirement stipulates having been in regula r employment for at least two -and -a-half  of the past 10 years. U nder -30s can access social assistance where they have a vocational education.  Educational assistance  People  who fulfil the general eligibility criteria but who are under 30 years of age and without a vocational education are eligible for education al assistance.  Integration benefit  People  who fulfil the general eligibility criteria but do not meet the residence requirement fo r social assistance are referred to the integration benefit.   Asylum se ekers are supported by the immigration service  rather than social assistance schemes.  In 2021, out of a population of 5  840  000 , there were 467  600 people  in households with family equivali sed income below 60% of the median  income  (considered low income in Denmark ). Of these, 157  700 were in households receiving one of the social assistance benefits, including 46  200 children ( Ydelseskommissionen , 2021).  COVID -19-related changes  The work requirement generally stipulates a minimum of 225 hours of ordinary work annually in order to re tain the entitlement to full social assistance. Th at requirement was suspended for four  months in spring 2020 and for six months in the winter of 2020 –2021. Claimants  who did not fulfil the requirement during the first or the second Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  wave of COVID -19 and thus r isked reduced/withdrawn benefit  gained an extra four/six months in which to fulfil the requirement. In practice, the changes mean t that no social a ssistance claimants saw  their benefits reduced due to insufficient work during the C OVID -19 outbreak.  Concerns  Homeless people are o ne of the most vulnerable groups and have difficulty in meeting the requirements in the social assistance system , such as a permanent address , which is a prerequisite to open a  bank account  and receive social assistance benefit  (municipalities do not pay benefits in cash ).  Another group that may have non -take -up problems are  spouses provided for by their spouse. This group comprises wo men , primarily from the Middle East and North Africa, Pakistan, and Turkey , whose family do not apply for social assistance because of the obligation to participate in various employment and social measures.  1.2  Coverage  The Commission on the Minimum Income Benefit System noted the complexity of the MI benefit system and the resulting high administrative burden for applicants, who must find out their rights and obligations , and then  meet the various documentation and compliance requirements . Social workers often assist MI applicants with the application form and navigating the system.  Denmark has undertaken little research into non -take -up. However, data on the income sources of the working -age population suggest that most people that need MI support seem to get it. The majority of the low -income population either receive  income from work (including self -employment), from work and study grants (students), or from social security, incl uding social assistance.  Only a relatively small group of the working -age population do not have their own income from work or social security  or study grants.  One notable subset of th at group are those who avoid social assistance because they do not want to participate in activation and other mandatory measures , instead choosing to be solely economically supported by their spouse (ægtefælleforsørgede) . The size of this group is not known, but is thought to primarily consist of women from Middle Eastern and  North African countr ies, Pakistan, and Turkey ( Ydelseskommissionen,  2021) . There are no easy solutions to increase their take -up, which is considered to reflect their lack of participation in society at large. It is not politically acceptable  to remove all activation conditions for social assistance , therefore other solutions are being sought to increase parti cipation of this group in the wider community . For example, h olistic plans for social housing areas (helhedsplaner)  include peer -to-peer initiatives that show promise in getting women of this group to participate in local activities and courses (e.g. Neigh bourhood Mothers (bydelsmødre) ) run by women who are themselves often migrants from the same countries ). Some larger municipalities , such as the job centres in Copenhagen Municipality,  employ special social workers that are experts on social control.  These efforts have yet to be studied and made public.  Until recently, many homeless people found it difficult to prove that they met the residence requirements to receive social assistance , and were thus granted only the lower integration benefit. In January 20 19, however, the Ombudsman of the Parliament decided that a homeless person who did not meet the ordinary documentation requirements  of residence but who could provide oral testimony was eligible for  social assistance rather than integration benefit. Final ly, in November 2020 , the Board of Appeal (Ankestyrelsen)  declared that the local authority must instead establish evidence of the homeless applicant having lived abroad (Ankestyrelsen , 2020).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  1.3  Adequacy  In 2020, 41.9% of all social assistance recipients wer e at -risk -of-poverty  (AROP, i.e. they had income below 50% of the median ) and 66.4% had an  income below 60% of the median (Statistics Denmark, 2020). That compared to  42.9% below 50% of the median line and 66.5% below 60% of the median  in 2019 . Benefit formulae  In general, age, education, residence record, employment record, health and pregnancy status, housing situation, civil status, and family situation are used to differentiate between different categories of MI recipient. These categories have implications for benefit levels and adequacy. For example, there are 26 different categories of young people below the age of 30 in the social assistance and educational assi stance schemes. These categories are associated with benefits at 16 different levels. The monthly benefits range from EUR 862 to EUR 4 091.  MI recipients  may receive linked supplementary benefits, such as special housing support, help in special situations , and temporary child allowances , or universal benefits not linked to MI, such as child and youth allowance, child allowance and individual housing support (see Section 1.4) . These supplementary benefits must be considered when assessing the adequacy of be nefits for MI recipients.  The benefit level of social assistance depends on the claimant ’s civil and family status. A single person over 30 years of age, without children , is entitled to  receive EUR 1 573 per month in social assistance only. Claimants can receive supplementary benefits, including the special housing supplement (særlig støtte) , based on the need to cover especially high costs of  family support or housing for a limited period , as well as other supplements (enkeltstøtte)  in special cases of considerable and unforeseeable expenses. Some reductions are also possible , such as in the case of refusal to participate in activities , reductions for failing to meet the 225 -hour work requirement in the previous 12 months , a cap on t he total amount of assistance, special housing supplement (særlig støtte)  and individual housing benefit (individual boligstøtte) . The benefit level of education al assistance depends on the claimant’ s pregnancy status, mental illness (certain diagnoses qua lify for a diagnosis supplement), living with or without parents, civil status, family status, and when  they may be able to start education (those unable to start within 12 months qualify for an activity supplement). In total, there are 16 categories of cl aimants , with six levels of benefits.  Adjustment for household composition . The benefit levels vary according to civil status and whether the claimant provides for children. Wh ile a single person aged 30+ who does not provide for a child receives EUR 1 573  per month, a single person aged 30+ with provider responsibilities receives EUR 2 090 per month.  A couple not in work , but with children , receives EUR 4 180 per month.  Sufficiency of MI benefit packages to meet recipients’ needs  Table 1 sets out the benefits (social assistance and supplementary benefits , plus the effect of benefit cap and taxes , to arrive at the disposable income. To assess whether the total benefits are adequate , it relates the disposable income to reference minimum budgets for the d ifferent family types. To assess whether the total benefits lift MI recipients out of poverty, it relates the disposable income to different shares of the median income : 40% reflecting the risk of extreme poverty  (as per the European Commission);  50% the D anish tradition  (as well as non -governmental organisations (NGOs) and the Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD);  and 60% (historically used by the European Commission and supplemented b y several indicators in recent years ). The over all conclusion is that MI benefits are good for some , but not all,  types of household. Substantial differences are evident in the level of benefits , depending on Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  the recipient’ s scheme and category  (reflecting their age, education, employment record, resid ence record, and ability to work and study ). In general, education al assistance and the integration benefit grant lower benefits to  young people and (predominantly ) migrants , respectively . Table 1 shows this effect for a single person on education al assist ance , where a recipient with an activity allowance reaches 122% of the risk of extreme poverty line , but only 84% without the additional allowance. A couple on integration benefit receives only four -fifths of the extreme poverty line. Social assistance kee ps both the single and the couple household out of extreme poverty.  Denmark frequently uses 50% of median income to define those with l ow income s (Ekspertudvalget om fattigdom , 2013; Ydelseskommissionen , 2021). Using the Danish measure for low income at 50% of the median income, only single -person recipients of the education al allowance and the activity allowance are not in the group of low -income households. All households are below the 60% EU AROP thre shold. Again, the integration benefit and the education al allowance (without activity allowance) are close to half the level.  Table 1.  Tax -benefit situation of select households according to their main social assistance benefit, 2021   Educational assistance  Educati onal assistance with activity allowance  Integration benefit  Integration benefit  Social assistance  Social assistance  Household  Single  Single  Couple  Couple, 3 children  Single, 3 children  Couple, 3 children   EUR  Social assistance  861  1 573  1 674  2 340  2 091  4 182  Special housing allowance  0 141  0 0 87 7 Individual housing allowance  81 81 101  484  484  188  Child and youth allowance  0 0 0 390  390  390  Child allowances (ordinary and extra)  0 0 0 0 269  0 Special child allowance  0 0 0 0 585  0 Effect of benefit cap  0 0 0 0 437  202  Taxes  121  400  215  464  592  1 170  Disposable income  961  1 398  1 560  2 750  2 884  3 402   Percentage of equivalised income  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  At 40% of the median  84 122  113  80 105  99 At 50% of the median  67 98 91 64 84 79 At 60% of the median  56 81 76 53 70 66  Percentage of reference minimum budgets  Share of minimum budget  70 101  74 81 109  100   Gross replacement rate of one minimum wage of:  Minimum wage, unskilled  42 69 68 123  133  138  Note s: Assumes  that no recipients have income from work. Rent set at the level of the median rent of social assistance recipients , plus utilit y costs (electricity, heating, and water at EUR 105 for single  people , EUR 157 for single  people  with three  children, EUR 147 for couples, and EUR 171 fo r couples with three  children aged 7 -14 years), EUR exchange rate as at  November 2021. Assumes  that recipients of integration benefit have earned rights to full child allowances. Estimates of median income based on Ydelseskommissionen  (2021). Equivalence s cales based on ((number of pe ople  in household *0.6). Minimum wage refers to the level  for unskilled , according to the HK.  Minimum reference budgets for family types from Ydelseskommissionen  (2021).  A better measure of adequacy is whether or not disposable incomes can meet the need reflected in minimum reference budgets. Table 1 shows that social assistance and education al assistance with an activity allowance provide adequate benefits that can meet t he basic needs of households. However, this is not the case for recipients of the integration benefit and of education al assistance without the activity allowance.  The examples  in Table 1 assume that households are entitled to support for their housing sit uation. In 2021, the Commission on the Minimum Income Benefit System  estimated that 43% of social assistance recipients received individual housing allowance, 13  150 recipients received both special housing allowance and individual housing allowance, and 4  850 recipients received only the special housing allowance. As a result, only about half of social assistance recipients receive economic support for housing. Ineligibility may be the result of household partners with too high income, homelessness, or res idence in apartments and rooms that do not meet the eligibility criteria for housing allowance (which includes  access to own kitchen and toilet).  Benefit cap on total benefits  The adequacy of benefits differs between MI recipients depe nding  on their categ ory of social assistance and whether they are eligible for other benefits , as well as whether they are subject to the cap on total benefits. The total amount of social assistance after tax and special housing benefit (særlig støtte)  cannot exceed 90% of pr evious net earnings1. For all recipients of social assistance , there is a  cap on the total amount of special housing benefit and housing benefit (boligstøtte)  that can be  receive d. This cap depends factors such as age  and living situation ( dependent, married/cohabiting, single ). Recipients of social assistance who live in certain special housing due to  1 If this amount is not a reasonable expression of the applicant’s earning capacity, the average income in the last three calendar months is used instead. From the fourth month onwards, the total amount cannot exceed the maximum unemployment benefit after tax.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  disability are exempt  from this ceiling. T he cap does not mean that the amount of social assistance is reduced, but , rather,  that the  person receives lower special housing benefit and housing benefit.  The duration of payment is unlimited in theory. In practice, however, the amount received may be reduced where someone who is able to work has not worked a minimum of 225 ho urs in the previous 12 months and has received assistance for one year within the previous three years.  There is no link between needs and benefit levels, but the Commission on the Minimum Income Benefit System  has propose d a minimum budget to set benefit levels in a future system.  In 2017, two out of three social assistance recipients were in the first income decile, with one in five in the second decile ( Ydelseskommissionen,  2021). In particular, recipients of educatio nal assistance and integration benefits were in the first income decile. Only 4% of MI recipients were in the upper half of the income distribution. There is no available information on the coverage of MI among working -age population with less than 40% of medi an income.  One of the weaknesses of the existing MI system is that it treats people in similar situations differently. A family of two adults and two children will receive different levels of total benefits depending  on their benefit category. In general,  the system grants higher benefits to single providers than to couples, mainly because there are special universal child allowances to single providers.  Benefits are indexed annually with wages, albeit not fully. The gradual indexation implies that benefits are regulated with wages two years previously , minus 0.75% (in 2020 -2023). In addition, contributions to the new compulsory pension scheme for social security claimants are deducted - 0.3% of the benefit in 2019, 0.6% in 2020 and 0.9% in 2021.  1.4  Links with other benefits  Recipients of social assistance may be entitled to one or more supplementary benefits , which may or may not be linked to their receipt of MI benefits. The supplementary benefits linked  to receipt of MI benefits are the special housin g benefit and help in special situations, the bonus for learning Danish, and the temporary child allowance.  The special housing benefit  for people on social assistance is granted as a supplement to those who fulfil the conditions to receive social assistan ce and who are in a particularly difficult situation due to high housing costs. It is paid to families without children with a net rent (gross rent minus general housing benefits) exceeding EUR 424 per month , and to families with children with a net rent a bove EUR 618. For families with children, all net rent above EUR 611 per month per adult is paid ( EUR 625 if the child is not living at home), reduced by EUR 114 for the second and each subsequent child ( EUR 94 if the child is not living at the home).  The total amount of social assistance after tax and special housing benefit cannot exceed 90% of previous net earnings. If this amount is not a reasonable expression of the applicant’s earning capacity, the average income in the last three calendar months is u sed. From the fourth month onwards, the total amount cannot exceed the maximum unemployment benefit after tax.  The municipality may provide help in special situations  (e.g. healthcare expenses, medicine, dental treatment) that are not covered under any oth er legislation, if the claimant is financially incapable of paying such expenses. Assistance shall only be granted if the treatment is necessary and reasonable on health grounds. According to the Act on Active Social Policy, the municipality can provide gr ants for dental care to those who are receiving benefits equivalent to the level of social assistance. The grant can only be given if the expense does not exceed EUR 1 344, and as long as the claimant does  not ask the municipality to pay the remaining cost s. Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  Recipients of integration benefit can get the bonus for learning Danish  as a supplement of EUR  217 per month for  six months.  The temporary child allowance  was introduced in January 2020 , target ing families with children aged 0 -14 years, in the social assistance system, that receive: social assistance and have their housing allowance and/or special support reduced because of the benefit cap; education al assistance and have their housing allowance  and/or special support reduced because of the cap; or, the relatively low integration benefits. This allowance is pa yable until a new MI benefit system comes into operation. The amount of the temporary child allowance varies depending on the social assist ance scheme, the civil status of the recipient, and the number of children below 15 years. Benefit ceilings vary  according to  the social assistance schemes, the reduction in the housing allowance/special support , and the civil status of claimants.  The supp lementary benefits not linked to MI receipt can be universal benefits that are automatically paid to everyone who fulfils certain criteria, e.g. the child and youth allowance (børne -og ungeydelsen) , or selective means -tested benefits.  The child and youth a llowance  is tax -free and paid to all families with children under the age of 18. The monthly amounts are EUR 208 per child aged 0 -2 years, EUR 164 per child aged 3 -6 years, and EUR 129 per child aged 7 -14. The allowance is tapered with income above a relat ively high threshold at EUR 111  278 annually. It is earned gradually and paid out in full after six years of employment or residence.  The child allowances  (børnetilskud)  are tax -free and paid to all single -provider households, regardless of their income. The ordinary monthly child allowance is EUR 67 per child. The extra child allowance (ekstra børnetilskud)  is paid together with the ordinary child allowance to single providers with  children in their custody . It amounts to EUR 68 per month , regardless of the number of children. This benefit is also earned gradually and paid out in full after six years of employment or residence.  The individual housing benefit (individuel boligstøtte) is a separate scheme, granted after an objective calculation based on housing expenditure, household  income , location of the home, and composition of the household, including the presence of children. It is payable to all those on low income s. For all recipients of social assistan ce, there is a cap on the total amount of housing benefit that can be received. However, recipients of social assistance who live in certain special housing due to disability are exempted from the cap. The cap depends on  factors such as age  and living situ ation ( dependent, married/cohabiting, single ).  Individual p lans  According to the Law on Active Employment Measures (2018), municipalities must have four meetings with the recipient within the first six months of receiving benefit s. In 2020, 3  478 social assistance recipients (4.2%) did not have this meeting.  After this  initial contact phase , the job centre and recipient agree a contact schedule. In general, s ocial assistance recipients who are not in a programme after six months have the right and obligation to start an offer of at least two weeks ’ duration.  The obligation may be forfei ted if they  are due to start ordinary employment within six weeks.  MI recipients get an individualised plan (‘My Plan ’) that describes the employment -oriented measures to get them  into a permanent job  (even low hours) in the ordinary labour market. The pla n contains traditional active labour market policy  (ALMP)  programmes, as well a s social services and other measures. MI recipients who need rehabilitation  will get a 'Rehabilitation Plan' , while recipients with multiple problems  can ask for a 'Holistic Pla n' that integrates the My Plan, Rehabilitation Plan and other action plans for the person or family. The Holistic Plan may give recipients a better overview of their situation.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  My Plan is generated by the c ase workers  in job centres  and sets out targets f or work and/or education, agreements and requirements for job search, ALMP offers, and activities that can improve the person’s physical, psychological, or social state of mind to enable them to participate in offers. It also contains other agreed measures , the status of current initiatives , and follow -up for previous measures. The job centre updates My Plan according to the person's current situation and needs , and it is digitally accessible to the individual concerned . Recipients of the integration benefit have a contract (under the Law on Integration ) that is accessible in My Plan.  MI recipients must participate in the agreed measures  and may be subject to sanctions for failing to adhere to employment -oriented measures . Sanctions are rarely applied in respect of social and health services.  The quality of casework depends on the working conditions of caseworkers . However, no official information is available on caseloads (see Dansk Socialrådgiverforening , 2020). The Asso ciation of Social Workers recommends 35 -55 cases for  job-ready social assistance recipients per social worker, 30 -50 for activity -ready social assistance recipients and education -ready education al assistance recipients, and 25 -45 for  activity -ready educati onal assistance recipients ( Dansk Socialrådgiverforening , 2021).  Table 1 shows the benefit composition and adequacy for different family types. For assessment of in -kind support , there is a lack of systematic surveys o f recipients’ perceptions of the socia l integration and employment measures. However, studies have shown positive employment effects of recipients’ meetings with front -line personnel  (social workers and job consultants) (Rosholm  et al., 2017; Andersen et al ., 2021).  2 Links with labour market ac tivation  The granting of social assistance is subject to claimants’ participation in an activation measure or any measure to improve their (or their partner’s) integration into the labour market  (e.g. taking part in a job -seeking course, work experience in  a company ). Students cannot apply. Those who cannot work due to incapacity are expected to participate in rehabilitation programmes. Payment of social assistance is suspended if the beneficiary or their  partner refuses, without sufficient reason, to participate in an activation measure or repeatedly fails to report to a job opportunity under the activation.  If a person receiving social assistance finds work and starts earning income, th at income is  deducted from the social assistance payments. The tap ering of benefits with income from work is set out in the regulation on Active Social Policy ( Declaration No 981 of 23rd September 2019). The social assistance benefit is tapered with income from work, less EUR 3.8 per hour. There are no direct statistics on how many social assistance recipients have their benefit tapered/reduced due to income from work , but it is possible to estimate from looking at those  who had ordinary waged hours of work during the benefit period. In 2019, 22.3% of social assistance re cipients (21  261 people) and 18.6% of education al assistance recipients (10  701 people) had ordinary hours of work and were thus subject to tapering.  Individuals who are not unemployed and have experienced other types of ‘social events ’, such as sickness or disability, may not be required to be available for work but must meet other requirements  (e.g. participation in rehabilitation activities ). Requirements are suspended in cases of disability.  In general, social assistance recipients continue to receive benefits when participating in ALMPs. There may be other benefits or supplements in certain instances. For example, people  on integration benefit will shift to an integration education benefit when they begin the ALMP.  Social assistance recipients are div ided into three groups. The 'job -ready' are those that are seen as being ready to provide for themselves within three months by taking 