Impact of MI schemes  Strengths of MI schemes  The current MI system is not particularly good at lifting people out of poverty. The temporary child allowance that goes to families with children affected by the benefit cap and/or the level of integration benefits lifts approximately 6  000 chi ldren out of poverty , at a cost of EUR 34 million annually (Ydelseskommissionen , 2021). The proposal of the Commission on the Minimum Income Benefit System lifts the same number of children out of poverty, but at no extra cost. The Commission’s proposal gets 1  000 additional people into work than the current benefit cap and work  2 www.jobindsats.dk   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  19  requirement, with a saving  of EUR 34 million that  will be returned into the MI benefit system.  There is a trend towards lower caseloads , increasing the quality of social work  at an individual level (Dansk Socialrådgiverforening , 2020).  Although the current MI benefit system may struggle with inconsistent treatment of people in the same situation, getting people into work, and transparency, i t is nevertheless far better than no system  at all.  Similarly, the MI  support system is criticised for its fragmentation and inconsistent service offer across municipalities. However, the reflects a  decentralis ed approach that seeks to place services as  close as possible to their users . Compared to other countries, the support system is likely quite professional , with special ised training for each aspect of service delivery.   Wider effects of MI schemes  In their literature review, Andersen et al. (2021) found MI benefits to have both direct and indirect , positive and negative effects on a wide range of issues (Andersen et al., 2021). The employment effects of benefit cuts (lower benefit levels or shorter maximum benefit periods ) are smaller for MI recipients than for unemployed people in receipt of unemployment insurance benefits (Andersen et al ., 2021).  In a study of MI recipients  of the integration benefit, severe benefit cuts were found to have consider able negative effects on crime (Andersen  et al., 2019). However, another study found these effects to be smaller and only (statistically) significant for women (Arendt, 2020). Interestingly, that study also found th at reduced benefits result ed in increased  use of healthcare benefits.  The indirect effects on children in families in receipt of MI benefits has not been  extensively  studied . However, a study of benefit cuts caused by the benefit cap  found that  they led to 1.5% more children in foster care, an i ncrease of 25% compared to the children in the control group  (Wildemann and Fallesen , 2017). A larger group of studies looked at the effects of being raised in families that are AROP and found clear evidence that people who grew up in low -income families o btain lower grades in primary school, are less likely to get a youth education, and are more often unemployed and on disability pension (Sivertsen and Montgomery, 2015; Lesner, 2018).  There are no studies on how the MI benefit system improves well -being in  the general population, although it could be hypothesised that the system provides a safety net for the whole population , leading to greater social cohesion and less risk adverse behaviour.   Gaps in knowledge  of the effectiveness of MI schemes and data li mitations  There is a lack of systematic knowledge on how MI recipients experience their contact  with the MI system. Greater understanding of those experiences and their effects on recipients’ intentions and behaviour could help in the design and implement ation of policies that work as intended. Survey data are needed, together with register data on benefit -work dynamics. Caseworkers are seen as central to unemployed  people’s job chances , but the lack of data linking individual caseworkers to individual MI recipients hinders quantitative evaluations. Integrated services and holistically oriented case management are promoted  as best practice b y the National Board of Social Services, for example . However, there is a lack of systematic evaluation of various types of integrated services for different target groups and different organisations of holistically oriented case management.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  20   Challenges associated with poverty alleviation, labour market transition and social integration  The complexity, unequ al treatment of recipients, deprivation of children in families in receipt of MI, and lack of effectiveness in meeting social and economic goals were  widely acknowledged when the government established  the Commission on the  Minimum Income Benefit System in December 2019. The Commission was tasked  with analysing the benefit system and making recommendations for a new system. In particular, it was asked to design a system that is less complex and that pays special attention to families with children and work and study  incentives . The Commission analysis found that the existing system covers a diverse group of people with different challenges and living standards , depending on their family situation and type of minimum income benefit (generally the social assis tance benefits are much higher than the education al assistance and the integration benefit). The existing system is so complex that it is difficult for both social workers and benefit recipients  to navigate, which reduces the effect of the incentiv es to wo rk and study.  In May 2021 the Commission recommended a simpler system that follows a set of clear principles: 1) simplicity and transparency to ensure legal certainty and informed decision -making ; 2) security of recipients’ finances;  3) a fair benefit leve l related to family needs ; 4) equal rights for people in equal situations ; 5) clear and positive economic incentives to work and study ; and 6) children’s right  to an active life of their own. Th at simpler system would be achieved by replacing the existing system with three benefits and, for example, 26 categories of young people  at eight benefit levels  (with one benefit at two levels  – basic and increased). The lower bounds would be set by using the reference budget method and the higher bounds by looking at the level of the state study grant ( basic benefit level) and 85% of the maximum unemployment benefit (increased benefit level) , which is just under the de facto minimum wage (about UR 2 650 per month for unskilled workers). A new Free Time Allow ance  would  cover the expenses of children in families , with children receiving EUR 60 each month to reimburse their expenses for  sports, music, extracurricular events etc. The integration of these principles into a new system will be clearer in February 20 22, when the government launches its proposal for a new system.  Similarly, the complex contact  of vulnerable groups with various  health, social, education, employment, housing, and family sections of municipalities is widely regarded as one of the major ch allenges for effective measures . Better integrated projects, longer  time frames , and revision of economic incentives, are some of the things that the Reform Commission is urgently seeking to improve in light of the fact that 7% of children do not pass their  primary school exam  and 20% of young people do not get a youth education, resulting in about 200  000 people at the margins of the labour market ( Reformkommissionen , 2021). The Commission met  in October 2020 and its policy proposals are due in three reform  packages in 2022 : spring  - education from cradle to grave ; summer  - interaction of the system and adults at the margins of the labour force ; and winter  - you ng people ). It looks at best practices in the municipalities on how to manage, organise and delive r integrated services across administrative silos , as well as investigating  the reform of economic incentives to promote cross -sectoral integrated services and investment in people.    Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  21  6 