Impact of MI schemes  Previous evaluations indicated that the bottom decile groups benefitted from increase in the subsistence level (Masso et al., 2019; Võrk, Paulus and Leppik, 2016). In 2016, the subsistence level increased to EUR 130 (from EUR 90 in 2015). As a result, the mean income of first decile group increased by 8.3% due to the changes in means -tested benefits (Võrk, Paulus and Leppik, 2016). Ex ante analysis has indicated the positive effect of the subsistence level increase on direct poverty reduction (Trumm and Kasearu, 2011;  Võrk, Paulus and  Leppik, 2014). Since 2019, the subsistence level has remained unchanged, resulting in income loss among the first decile group in 2021 compared to 2020 (Laurimäe and Piirits, 2021).  A study carried out by Praxis found that the current methodology for esti mating the subsistence minimum should be changed, as it was established in 2004 and considers only basic needs.  In the case of unemployment allowance, increases in the rate  of this as well as of unemployment insurance benefits and unemployment allowance has had a positive effect on income (income increased by 0.12% between 2020 and 2021), especially in the first decile group (+0.73%) (Laurimäe and Piirits, 2021).  How low  coverage is one of the key challenges for the Estonian unemployment protection system. In 2019, 38% of newly registered unemployed people received neither unemployment insurance benefit nor unemployment allowance (see Section 1.2).  The main reason for this was an insufficient employment record preceding registration as unemployed. In 2020, the Ministry of Social Affairs notified its intention to draft legislation to improve the system (including coverage) (Laurimäe, 2020b).  The government´s 100 -day plan wa s approved at the beginning of 2021 and work has continued to improve the protection it provides, including extending coverage to new target groups (e.g. sole proprietors ) and the adjustment of benefit  levels to  economic cycles (Vabariigi Valitsus, 2021).  The share of approved applications for subsistence benefits is quite high (91%), but take -up has not been examined directly. Previous estimates based on poverty rates indicate that the take -up of subsistence benefits is fairly high (see Section 1.2). Viies  (2009) noted that non -take up is likely affected by administrative issues, with applications being complex and requiring several documents  (see Section 1). The Ministry of Social Affairs is working on a draft amendment to the Social Welfare Act that will  (among other things) amend the list of documents required to apply for subsistence benefits (Sotsiaalministeerium, 2021d). It also plans to improve the availability of social support services (e.g. debt counselling) to improve benefit recipients’ situatio ns as a whole.  Previous research found that low incomes can put households in difficult situations, with insufficient income to pay loans, rents, or utility bills. In 2019, for example, 23% of household members receiving subsistence benefits were in debt ( Sinisaar and Luide, 2021).  The theoretical and empirical literature suggests that it is important to find a balance between the amount of benefit and maintaining motivation to work. It is suggested that lower benefits will motivate people who are able to w ork to move to the labour market more quickly (Leetmaa et al., 2012; Laurimäe et al., 2019). In addition, several reforms to Estonian minimum income schemes are expected to encourage employment and working (Sinisaar, 2018; Laurimäe, 2020a). Firstly, as of January 2018, part of the family’s income is excluded when calculating the subsistence benefit. Secondly, since September 2020, it is possible to take on temporary work while being Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the  effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  9  registered as unemployed. The effects of these changes on employment and in comes will be analysed in 2022.  Governance and integrated service provision is complicated by the fact that benefits, activation services and social services for the unemployed and inactive people are provided by different institutions, including local mun icipalities and the EUIF.  Research suggests that the various institutions should work more closely together, for example to provide active labour market services (OECD, 2021). Subsistence benefits are administered at local level, the assumption being that they are better assessed locally. This may, however, make the application process more complex and varied (e.g. not all municipalities allow online applications). When providing social assistance, it is important for social workers to be more proactive to reach those who are not aware of the possibility of assistance/help or who cannot ask for it9. Lack of resources remains the main reason for the lack of preventive work, however.   6 