Governance mechanisms   Subsistence benefits (including supplementary benefit) are financed from general tax revenue, with earma rked funds allocated from the central government to Estonia’s 79 local governments each year.  The administration of the scheme is the responsibility of local governments, which manage applications, assess eligible households, and arrange payment.  The numbe r of employees varies greatly from local government to local government. In 2020, 342 employees were involved in processing applications for subsistence benefits.8 While it seems likely that local governments may be best placed to assess the need for bene fits and social assistance, personnel differences may affect local government capacity to deliver those services. Similarly, the application process may vary in complexity between local authorities (see Sections 1.1. and 5).  A general evaluation of welfare  policy is carried out by the Ministry of Social Affairs. The Ministry has adopted the Welfare Development Plan 2016 –2023, which includes evaluation principles and social indicators for performance evaluation (e.g. General objective No. 2. Reducing social inequalities and poverty, with greater social inclusion measured in terms of absolute and relative poverty rates). Each year, the Ministry publishes output indicators on subsistence benefit recipients (numbers of households and household members, average a mount of benefits, etc.) and share of applications approved. In general, regular outcome evaluations are missing, but annual EUROMOD updates estimate the effect of subsistence benefit policy rules on alleviation of income inequality.  In addition, annual po verty rates with and without subsistence benefit is calculated and used. Again, there is no regular cycle of evaluations, but ex ante or ex post evaluations of the impact of new or existing measures may be carried out as needed. Analyses are also carried o ut to improve measures or increase their efficiency. In general, these evaluations are published.   8 Information received from the Social Insurance Board.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the  effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  8  Labour market services and unemployment benefits (including unemployment allowance) are provided by the EUIF , which  consists of a central office and 15 county  departments, with a total of 29 counselling centres (as at end -2020) (Eesti Töötukassa, 2020). Detailed information on the governance mechanisms of unemployment allowance is presented in the annex.  5 