Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  Linki ng benefits with social services is a key challenge for the Estonian social protection system. There is no one -stop shop approach, with benefits, activation services and social services for unemployed and inactive people provided by different institutions,  including local municipalities, the Estonian National Social Insurance Board, and the EUIF. While labour market services are provided uniformly across Estonia at a predetermined service standard, the availability and quality of social services depends on the local municipality (Võrk et al., 2015). In 2016, the amended SHS aimed to improve the availability and quality of social services by developing a common quality framework (Võrk et al., 2015; SHS). The quality principles introduced in 2018 include perso n-centeredness, empowering nature of the service, orientation towards outcome, needs -based approach, integral approach, protection of a person's rights, involvement, competence and ethics of the employee, and the good work organisation and high -quality man agement of the organisation (§3 SHS). Although the amendment to the regulation and introduction of the quality framework has not been evaluated, there have been some revisions to clarify the standards.   Local governments may require applicants or recipient s of subsistence benefit to be registered with the EUIF in order to ensure they are actively seeking a job. A recently published Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD) report recommended several areas of improvement for ALMP provisio n in Estonia, including the need to network with other institutions (including municipalities) to assist those weakly attached to the labour market and find solutions together (OECD, 2021).   Local municipalities must assess whether an applicant for subsist ence benefit (or their family members) also need other social welfare services (§134 SHS). According to the SHS, the task of local municipalities is to provide and finance the following social services: debt counselling; domestic service; personal assistan t; shelter service/safe house service; provision of dwelling; social transport; general care services provided outside the home; and childcare services.  Services are available for those not fit for work (e.g. personal assistance, social transport) in orde r to increase their independent coping ability and participation in all areas of life (§27,  §38 SHS). Those with reduced work ability can also use services provided by the EUIF (e.g. peer support, working with a support person, work rehabilitation, assisti ve work equipment, commuting benefits, support for continuation of employment).  If a person needs long -term and diverse assistance to improve their ability to cope independently, the principle of case management will be used to coordinate cooperation betwe en several assistance organisations (§9 SHS). The provision of assistance shall include the preparation of a case plan and coordination of an activity Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the  effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  7  schedule, determination of a case coordinator, and an agreed procedure for mutual exchange of information . There is no public information on the participation of the recipients of subsistence benefits in such services. Information on the total number of participants and costs (all service users) shows that in 2020, 2  041 people used debt counselling service (total cost EUR 192  000), 15  500 people received social transport services ( EUR 5.3 million), 8  279 people received domestic service (EUR 10.5 million), 3  030 people received support person service (EUR 7.8 million), 9  196 households received provision of dwelling service (EUR 16.1 million), 411 people received personal assistance services (EUR 1.3 million), 5  581 children received childcare services (EUR 14.7 million), and 55  272 persons received other social services offered by local governments (e.g. foo d aid, health promotion activities, events, counselling services) (S-veeb, 2021).  However, b y the end of 2022, a study commissioned by the Ministry of Social Affairs will be published , which will analy se the impact of subsistence benefit  and debts on socio -economic compliance and labour market activity.  Access to general services information is provided under unemployment allowance (health insurance and dental care). The employability and willingness of those unemployed to find a job are assessed by EU IF on the basis of individual action plans. The EUIF also provides  services to meet specific needs, such as debt counselling, addiction counselling or psychological counselling (EUIF, 2021b). All those registered as unemployed are covered by public health insurance, while dental care is subject to a partial co -financing scheme in the form of benefit -in-kind  (see annex for details) . 4 