Summary  The main minimum income scheme in Estonia is subsistence benefit  (toimetulekutoetus ), though the unemployment assistance scheme complements this by provid ing support to jobseekers who are not eligible – or no longer eligible – for unemployment insurance benefit  (i.e. unemployment allowance (töötutoetus )). Unemployment al lowance recipients who have exhausted their right to unemployment allowance but are still unemployed or inactive can also apply for subsistence benefit. Subsistence benefits are paid only when all other measures aimed at alleviating poverty have been taken  up. Ministry of Social Affairs data indicate that  the share of household members receiving subsistence benefits was 1.4% of the total population in 2020 (10  501 households and 18 295 household members). The total amount of expenditure on subsistence benef its was EUR 15.9 million. The share of recipients has decreased in recent years, but no studies have directly estimated the non -take up of subsistence benefits.  The subsistence benefit level has been criticised as inadequate (Laurimäe  et al., 2019; Koppel et al., 2018;  Welfare Development Plan 2016 -2023). Previous analysis indicates  that the subsistence level is too low. Since 2016, the subsistence level for a single person household is higher than the minimum estimated food basket, bu t lower than the estimated subsistence minimum or absolute poverty line.  However, the average amount of the subsistence benefit that also includes coverage of housing costs  is higher than the absolute poverty line  (EUR 251.09 vs. EUR 220.48 per month  in 20 20). In addition, in April 2022, the Estonian Government approved an increase in the subsistence level  from EUR 150 to EUR 200 . Low -income groups have benefitted from previous increases in the subsistence level (Masso et al., 2019; Võrk, Paulus and Leppik,  2016), and the subsistence level increase will have positive effects on direct poverty reduction  (Trumm and Kasearu, 2011; Võrk, Paulus and Leppik, 2014).  Both subsistence benefit recipients and those receiving unemployment allowance are required to meet  activation criteria. Studies suggest that active labour market policy (ALMP) measures generally increase the future work prospects of the participants. In addition, two changes have sought to encourage employment : 1) since September 2020, it is possible t o take on temporary work while being registered as unemployed; and 2) of January 2018, part of the family’s income is excluded when calculating the amount of subsistence benefit payable.  From an administrative point of view, subsistence benefit application s happen locally and may vary - some municipalities allow online applications, while others require an individual to present themselves in person at the office. Several documents are required to prove eligibility, which can be somewhat complex.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evi dence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  Annex 2 outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent yea rs, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating a nd indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the  effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  2  1 