Links with labour market activation  There is a link between activation measures and social assistance benefits. Local governments can refuse  or reduce  subsistence benefits to people of working age or who are capable of working who are not studying or working and who have re peatedly and for no good reason refused to accept suitable positions (§134 SHS). Local governments have access to the EUIF’s information system to check whether people applying for subsistence benefits have registered as unemployed at the EUIF. In 2020, local governments refused to pay support in 109 cases, usually related to the activation criteria.  Subsistence benefit recipients who are registered as unemployed are subject to the same activation regime as other registered unemployed or other unemployment allowance recipients (e.g. individual action plan). There are no data on the activation services received by the recipients of subsistence benefits from local governments or the EUIF6, nor is the number of subsistence benefit recipients required to active ly seek work readily available. However, statistics suggest that in 2020, 34% of household members receiving the benefit were registered unemployed (30% in 2019) (Sotsiaalministeerium, 2021a).  Subsistence benefit recipients continue to receive full benefit s when participating in ALMP measures. Grants, transport and accommodation benefits paid on the basis of the Labour Market Services and Benefits Act are not included as income when calculating the subsistence benefit (§133 SHS). Local governments can also exclude grants and scholarships that encourage work and study.  Since 2018, if a subsistence benefit applicant or member of a family applying for the benefit starts to earn an income and was granted subsistence benefit for at least two months, the following  shall not be included in the income test (§133 SHS): 1) 100% of earned income during the first two months; 2) 50% of earned income during the following four months. This exception can be used by each family member once in a 24-month period. In 2019, 443 u nique households used the 50% exception and 1  127 used the 100% exception. In 2020, these numbers were slightly lower (362 and 822, respectively).7 Income earned by dependent children (those studying in basic or high school, up to 19 years of age) is not considered income for the purposes of calculating subsistence benefit.  While the changes implemented in 2018 are expected to motivate working (Sinisaar, 2018), there is little research into the effect of subsistence benefit activity measures. At the end of  2021, the Ministry of Social Affairs commissioned a study to assess the impact of subsistence benefits and the effect of changes in the subsistence benefit  6 Based on information requested from the EUIF.  7 Based on information requested from the Social Insurance Board.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the  effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  6  system on economic coping and labour market activity. The results of the study should be available in mid -2022.   The EUIF is responsible for providing ALMP s and the payment of unemployment benefits, including unemployment allowance. All unemployment allowance recipients are required to actively seek work and comply with their individual action plan (§3 TTTS). Failure to comply with activity requirements resul ts in sanctions. Evaluation studies have examined the impact of labour market training (Lauringson et al., 2012; Anspal et al., 2012), wage subsidies (Anspal et al., 2012), work experience and business -start -up grants (Villsaar et al., 2012 and 2014), and mobility support (Melesk et al., 2019). They found that the various measures increased the future employment prospects of the participants. (See annex for further details) . 3 