Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  The main minimum income scheme in Estonia is subsistence benefit  (toimetulekutoetus ). The unemployment assistance scheme comple ments this by providing income support to jobseekers who are not eligible – or no longer eligible – for unemployment insurance benefit ( i.e. unemployment allowance ( töötutoetus )). Detailed information  on unemployment allowance ( eligibility criteria, coverage, adequacy , link with labour market activation and other services, and governance)  is presented in Annex  1.  Some changes in the subsistence benefit system have affected eligibility and adequacy. The main changes relate to the income cons idered in calculating the benefit (see Sections 1.1. and 1.2) and increase in the subsistence level (see Section 1.3). There were no major changes in the unemployment allowance scheme before 2020.  This section describes the minimum income scheme, its eligi bility criteria (Section 1.1), coverage (Section 1.2), adequacy (Section 1.3) and links to other benefits (Section 1.4).  1.1  Eligibility  According to the Social Welfare Act (SHS), subsistence benefit is provided to a person living alone or to a family whose m onthly net income is below the subsistence level, after the deduction of the housing expenses (up to a certain limit) (§131). There are no age restrictions and all legal residents in the country are entitled to the benefit.  Income considered in calculating the benefit is defined after deducting taxes and social contributions. According to §133 SHS, income earned by minors, single and periodic benefits, benefits paid to disabled persons (except disabled parent allowance), stud ent loans, income of students still in education, basic allowance, needs -based study allowance and needs -based special allowance, grants, transport and accommodation benefits paid to unemployed persons, and alimony paid for children are excluded from consi deration. The local government may also choose to exclude grants and benefits supporting study or work, or benefits paid to cover specific expenses or losses. In addition, since 2018, part of employment income is not considered income under certain conditi ons (see Section 2).  The subsistence benefit covers housing costs (subsistence benefit = subsistence level + housing costs – income). Housing costs considered include rent and housing, repayment of loans taken for renovation, water, wastewater and heating services, thermal energy or fuel consumed for supply of hot water, electricity and gas, land tax, building insurance, and transport of municipal waste (§133 SHS).  To obtain the subsistence benefit for a given month, an individual submits their application to the local government (in whose administrative territory their residence is located) not later than the last day of the month (§132 SHS). Benefits are applied and processed at local level and may vary between municipalities – some permit online applicati on while others require individual to submit in person. Applying for subsistence benefit requires several complex documents to prove eligibility. During the COVID -19 pandemic, applications could be submitted by email, or on paper to the local government ma ilbox, while social workers could be consulted by phone. In exceptional circumstances, documents may be submitted retrospectively. There is no information on how the eligibility rules and application procedures affect different sub -groups.  Those who have e xhausted their rights to unemployment insurance benefit but are still unemployed can apply for unemployment allowance ( töötutoetus ) (see annex for details) .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the  effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  3  1.2  Coverage  In 2020, 69  336 applications  to Subsistence benefit  were submitted, of which 63  340 were approved (91%). The share of household members of total population that received subsistence benefits was 1.4%. In total, 10  501 households and 18  295 household members received the benefits, a decrease compared to previous years. In 2020, the total amount  of expenditure on subsistence benefits was EUR 15.9 million and the average amount of benefit was EUR 251. Of those receiving the subsistence  benefit, 34% were registered unemployed, 33% were children (aged 0 -17), 2% were students, 7% were pensioners, 6% had reduced work ability, and 2% had no work ability.  Total expenditure for households with children amounted to EUR 7.4 million, for househol ds with registered unemployed it amounted to EUR 9.4 million, for households with pensioners it was EUR 1.1 million, and for households with reduced work ability it was EUR 1.6 million1 (Sotsiaalministeerium, 2021a).  In most cases, subsistence benefits ar e received for one to three months a year (typically in winter, when housing costs are higher) or 12 months a year. In 2020, 21% of the households that received subsistence benefit received it every month, while 20% received it only once (Sotsiaalministeer ium, 2021a).   Benefit take -up or non -take -up has not been studied, and evaluation is difficult because of the lack of data on housing costs2. Previous reports suggest that while take -up has not been evaluated per se, it might be low for administrative rea sons (Viies, 2009). It is possible to compare the absolute poverty rate with the share of subsistence benefit recipients in the total population. Previous evaluations based on poverty rates indicate that the take -up is fairly high: in 2012, the difference in the share of subsistence benefit recipients of total population (3%) and those in direct poverty (4.8%) was 1.8% (Võrk et al., 2015). In 20 20 (survey year) , the absolute poverty rate was 2.3%3, but the share of benefit recipients was 1.4% of the total population4. Nevertheless, the latest statistics indicate that the number of recipients of subsistence benefits has declined in recent years. In 2016, the share of household members of total population that received subsistence benefits was 2.1%, falling to 1.4% in 2020. In addition, as a minimum income guarantee scheme – and thus the lowest level of social protection - even a low non -take -up rate may be too high.  In Estonia, the unemployment assistance scheme provides an allowance for those who have exhau sted their rights to unemployment insurance benefit but are still unemployed. In 2020, 28  909 people received unemployment allowance (EUR 17.7 million)5. The main challenge for the Estonian unemployment benefit system is low coverage (Laurimäe et al., 201 9). In 2019, for example, 38% of newly registered unemployed people received neither unemployment insurance benefit nor unemployment allowance, only 35% were entitled to unemployment insurance benefit and 26% to unemployment allowance. To be considered eli gible for unemployment allowance, a person must have been employed or engaged in activity equivalent to working for at least 180 days during the preceding 12 months. This condition is often difficult to meet, especially for those with intermittent income  .(See annex for further details) .   1 One person/household could belong to different groups and thus be counted many times.  2 Housing costs are considered in calculating the entitlement and amount of subsistence benefit (see Sections 1.1 and 1.3).  3 The absolute poverty rate i s the proportion of people whose equivalised disposable income is below the absolute poverty threshold, which is the estimated subsistence minimum. Absolute poverty rate based on the Statistics Estonia Estonian Social Survey (e.g. Estonian EU -SILC) data.  4 Information from the Ministry of Social Affairs.  5 Data on recipients requested directly from the EUIF.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the  effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  4  1.3  Adequacy  The subsistence level is based on minimum expenditure on consumption of foodstuffs, clothing, footwear and other goods and services to satisfy primary needs. It therefore depends on household income, household str ucture, subsistence level, housing costs and limits of deductible housing costs established by local governments (§133 SHS). The general formula for calculating the subsistence benefit is: subsistence benefit = subsistence level + housing costs - income. T he level is fixed for each year by the State budget. In 2021, the subsistence level was EUR 150 per month for the first household member (or a single person) (100%), while in case of children under 18 years of age it is EUR 180 (120%) for each child. The s ubsistence level for the second and subsequent adult members of the family is EUR 120 per month (80%) (Sotsiaalministeerium, 2021b). However, i n April 2022, the Estonian G overnment approved an increase in the subsistence level  (Sotsiaalministeerium 2022) . Benefits are granted by local governments and the entitlement and amount payable are reevaluated every month.  The main critique of the subsistence level has been  its low value (Võrk et al., 2015). Since 2016, the subsistence lev el of the first household member is higher than the minimum estimated food basket, but lower than the estimated subsistence minimum or absolute poverty line. In 2020, the absolute poverty line and subsistence minimum was EUR 220. 48 per month, the subsisten ce level for the first (single) household member was EUR 150 per month and the minimum estimated food basket EUR 104. 86 per month. However, if the housing costs  are also considered , the average amount of the subsistence benefit  per application  is higher th an the absolute poverty line . In 2020, the average subsistence benefit amount was EUR 251.09  per month and the absolute poverty line was EUR 220.48 per month  (Sotsiaalministeerium 2021a) . Increasing the subsistence minimum was discussed in 2018, when an ev aluation found that the methodology for estimating the subsistence benefit level introduced in 2002 was out of date and needed revision to consider social inclusion and participation needs (Koppel et al., 2018). I n April 2022, the Estonian G overnment approved an increase in the subsistence level from EUR 150  to EUR 200  for the first household member, for the second and subsequent adult member  from EUR 120 to EUR 160 and in case of children from EUR 180 to EUR 240 . The change is expected to in crease the number of households receiving support by about 1,300  (Sotsiaalministeerium 2022).  As regards unemployment allowance, its level increased recently. In January 2021, the unemployment allowance was increased from EUR 189 to EUR 292 per month, putt ing it at 50% of the monthly minimum wage in 2021 (compared to 35% in 2020 (§31 TTTS) (see annex for further details).   1.4  Links with other benefits  Although there are no restrictions on receiving other benefits at the same time as the subsistence benefit, th ese are considered income in the calculation of that benefit (see exceptions in Section 1.1). In 2020, family benefits (parental benefit, child allowance and other monthly family benefits) accounted for 35%, disability benefits (work ability allowance and work -incapacity pensions) for 27%, and unemployment benefits for 9% of the (household) income considered when determining subsistence benefits (Sotsiaalministeerium, 2021a).  There are no separate housing allowances or support for essential services for sub sistence benefit recipients. However, upon determination of entitlement and amount of the benefit, housing expenses are considered within established limits (rent, electricity, etc.).  In 2020, heating accounted for 20% of total costs considered when determ ining subsistence benefits, electricity accounted for 11%, and water and sanitation for 8.2% (Sotsiaalministeerium, 2021a).  In addition, in certain cases , upon calculating a subsistence benefit, a local authority may take into account  other single housing expenses within a subsistence limit during one calendar year  (§133  SHS ). Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the  effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  5  A lump sum top -up benefit of EUR 15 per month is available to single -parent households, payable to a person receiving the subsistence benefit and whose dependant s/family members are aged under 18 years.  Local governments pay various additional benefits from their own budgets, such as special occasion benefits (birthdays, starting school, Christmas, etc.), benefits on unexpected events (tragedies, funerals, etc.). They have their own rules for applying such benefits, but the circle of beneficiaries is typically wider than those in receipt of subsistence benefits. Some of those additional benefits are needs -based and others are universal.  There is no information or d ata on how many recipients of unemployment allowance receive other social benefits (family benefits, etc.). However, there are some exceptions where benefits cannot be received at the same time  (see annex for further details) . 2  