Summary  The interpretation of adequacy depends on whether we look at the level of a single benefit or the level of the combined minimum income basket. Furthermore, family type and life situation have an impact on the results. When the  total income basket consisting of different forms of minimum benefits  is taken into consideration , the Finnish levels of minimum income protection are either in the middle or close to the top among EU Member States. According to Eurostat, Finnish income transfers effectively reduce the risk of poverty and, consequently , poverty rates in Finland are among the lowest in the EU.  The receipt of different forms of MI security benefits in Finland is more parallel than sequential (i.e. benefits are often paid on top of one another, and complement one another). This is the case with the labour market subsidy (LMS), h ousing allowance, and social assistance. These three forms of basic/minimum security benefits are strongly intertwined. For example,  62% of the persons receiving minimum unemployment benefits received  housing allowance, social assistance  or both of them , in addition to the unemployment benefit . In principle, all recipients of MI benefits are entitled to all social care, healthcare, rehabilitation, employment , and educational services.  Whereas for  housing allowance there are no requirement s to participate in activation o r any other labour market measures , there are some requirements as regards the LMS and social assistance .  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility cr iteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the acces s provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying s ituation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 Description of national schemes providing minimum inc ome support  Finnish social security  consists of three parts. The first part universally guarantees minimum income (MI) security for all legal Finnish residents (rather  than citizens)1. It includes ‘basic level’ income transfer benefits2 paid either at a  flat rate or after means -testing based on personal or household income. The second part consists of income -related social insurance for those in employment. The third part of the system includes municipal social care and healthcare services that universal ly cover all legal residents (see Figure 1; Kela, 2021a).   1 Asylum -seekers are not entitled to social security in Finland. However, they have the right to reception services which safeguard their necessa ry financial support and care. The right to get services continues through the processing of the asylum application.  The reception centre pays a reception allowance until the asylum application has been processed. In 2021, the amount of the monthly recepti on allowance (if they were not entitled to food in the reception centre) was €267 for people over 18, €316 for single parents, and €202 for children.   2 For example , minimum sickness allowance, minimum unemployment benefits, maternity benefits, housing allowance and social assistance (income support).  