Governance mechanisms  Governance of minimum income  schemes  The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health is responsible for legislation on  social assistance, and directs and co -ordinates social assistance as part of social welfare. Kela centrally administers the LMS, housing allowance, and basic social assistance. Kela has approximately 200 offices throughout the country. The 309 municipalit ies take care of supplementary and preventive social assistance  until the end of 2022. From the beginning of 2023, responsibility will be transferred to 22 wellbeing services counties.  There are complaints that the co -ordination between different authoriti es is not fully satisfactory. There are information gaps and people in vulnerable positions may fall in between different institutions (e.g. National Audit Office of Finland, 2020a). The connection between benefits in cash (mainly provided by Kela) and ben efits in kind (provided by municipalities) is not seamless. Furthermore, there are insufficient data on how social work and other municipal services are organised, and how the delivery of services varies between municipalities (Saikkonen & Ylikännö, 2020; see also Korpela et al ., 2020).  Monitoring  The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health has ultimate responsibility for co -ordination and monitoring of the existing  situation , development s, future trajectories, adequacy of benefits, and impact  of benefit s on poverty and income distribution.  One key aspect of monitoring is the processing time for benefits. Kela and municipalities or associations of municipalities must deliver the information necessary to monitor and control the fulfilment of the Act on Social  Assistance to the National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL) twice a year. The THL has a n online service (SOTKANET9) containing detailed data o n the recipients of MI benefits. The THL forwards the information to regional state administrative agencies , which  guide and supervise both municipal and private social welfare services in their areas (but not Kela's activities ). In some cases, the Deputy Chancellor of Justice and the Parliamentary Deputy Ombudsman have reacted against Ke la's decisions on basic social assistance , and Kela has been  blamed for delays and incomplete justification s for decisions.  Monitoring is the joint responsibility of the authorities participating in multi -disciplinary services. Kela has to monitor the dura tion of the LMS spells and the possible receipt of social assistance. The information is transferred to the municipalities and TEOs. The goal is a one -stop shop, but the seamless process does not always work as planned. There are complaints about the divis ion of labour between Kela and municipalities, in particular with regard to unemployed people who need supplementary social assistance from the municipality.  Kela constantly monitors fraud in benefit applications. To prevent the misuse of benefits, Kela ca rries out continuous development work and utilises information systems and new digital tools, for example, for revealing forged documents. The national income register, which became effective in 2019, allows Kela to monitor applicants’ income.  There is a l egal obligation to evaluate the adequacy of basic social security at the end of each government period. In evaluating the adequacy of basic security and access to services, the output of non -governmental organisations is important; for example, the baromet ers provided by the Finnish Federation for Social Affairs and Health. Since 2017, the Finnish Anti -Poverty Network, EAPN -Fin, has published the Poverty Watch ,  9 The Sotkanet.fi service contains over 2,000 indicators on health, welfare and functioning of the service -system at different regional categories (municipalities, healthcare districts and all levels of NUTS).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  which brings together poverty -related statistics and other research data and raises issues relati ng to basic security (also available in English).  5 Impact of minimum income  schemes  It is difficult to assess the precise relative role in poverty -reduction of MI benefits, other income transfers, and benefits. We do not have any counterfactuals to perform the evaluation. One way to overcome this problem would be to compare outcomes in different countries (i.e. different social policy systems) in terms of poverty -reduction and poverty levels at different levels of poverty thresholds. According to Eurostat (2021a and 2021), the AROP rate before income transfers in Finland was about the same level as the average for the 27 EU Member States (25.1% and 25.4%, respectively); whereas after income transfers were receive d, the Finnish AROP rate was lower than the EU -27 average (12.1% vs 17.1%). Consequently, the poverty -reduction rate was greater in Finland (52%) than in the EU on average (33%). Furthermore, the relative median AROP poverty gap in Finland (13.7%) was the second lowest in the EU (EU average 24.2%; Euro stat 2021c). The comparative data show that the Finnish social benefits system as a whole works comparatively well.  Table 2.  Poverty risks at different poverty thresholds and poverty -alleviation effect of MI benefits among the total population and among the recipients of different MI benefits   60%  50%  40%  Poverty rate  Poverty rate  Poverty rate  Total population  13.6  6.9 3.7 LMS  46.9  22.1  8.5 HA 56.7  26.7  11,9  SA 64.3  29.8  12.4  LMS+HA+S A 49.0  18.5  4.9 Poverty -alleviation effect  25.1  48.0  61.6  Calculations on poverty -alleviation effects are estimated by using the SISU micro -simulation model. Poverty -alleviation (%) = (poverty after MI transfers – poverty before MI transfers) / (poverty before MI transfers) *100 ( source: Honkanen, 2021).  The downside is that there are often work disincentives, which may contribute to long -term unemployment. However, the main problem is elsewhere. As the OECD (2020b) publication Faces of Joblessness Finland shows , 70% of the Finnish population lack ing stabl e employment face multiple employment barriers , and 40% face three barriers or more. The activation measures are therefore not always as effective as wished  for. The OECD recommendation was for more targeted measures that are better tailored to meet the ne eds of people facing  several barriers.  Similar conclusions were drawn from the Finnish basic income experiment, which ran during 2017 -2018 (Ylikännö & Kangas, 2021). When health problems form a barrier to employment, the conditionality of a social benefit  is not a relevant issue. To enhance re-employment possibilities and further activation of citizens, services are needed. In Finland, the TEOs offer services to unemployed job -seekers, as well as municipal health and social services, and education services . The emphasis in these services is on the transition towards more intensified multi -disciplinary work in a customer -oriented manner. Decent economic security is necessary, but is not a sufficient condition for re -employment. Income transfers must be accom panied by a wide array 