Links with labour market activation  Income testing and tapering  The gross income of household members affects the amount of housing allowance . An earnings deduction of €300 made from every household member’s wages or self -employment income brings the tapering rate to 33.6%: that is, earnings of €100 reduce the allowanc e by around €34 (Kangas & Simanainen, 2021: p.10). In the case of the LMS , there is an adjustment system for income from part -time or incidental work. Regarding ‘adjusted unemployment benefits’ ( soviteltu päiväraha ), employment income of up to €300 per mon th (the ‘exempt amount’) does not reduce benefits, but income greater than the exempt amount reduces the benefit by certain tapering percentages, usually 50% (Kangas & Simanainen, 2021: p.15). In the case of social assistance , of earned income, a maximum o f EUR 150 per month is not taken into account as a privileged income , also  a ‘minor income’ (€50 per month for a single person and €100 for a household) occasionally does not affect the level of income. In principle , the tapering percentage is 100%.  One s pecific problem with the Finnish MI benefit system is that a series of income -tested payments coming on top of one an other leads to high effective mar ginal tax rates, which may create severe work disincentives.  Requirements for participation in activation  and activation measures available  For housing allowance , there are no requirements to participate in any activation o r other labour market measures. Although  there are several  requirements in the case  of the LMS and social assistance, many of them are bas ed on an individual assessment of the need for various services. The assessment attempts to map all the relevant factors (e.g. health condition and ability to work) affecting the client's situation. (As regard take -up rates, see Section 3.)  The Act on Reha bilitative Work lays down provisions on rehabilitative work activities, which are social services.  According to the Act, social welfare and employment services must, in cooperation with the client, draw up an activation plan if a person under 25 years of a ge has received labour market support or social assistance for over 4 months or an unemployed person above that for over 12 months. T he plan may include rehabilitative work activities that are binding on the client.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10   The multi -sectoral employment promotion service is a joint operating model of the employment and business service office (TEO), municipality , and Kela. The model serves job-seekers who have been unemployed for a long period of time. In the multi -sectoral joint service model, various pu blic authorities offer services on a one -stop -shop basis. The service is available in the area of each TEO and in all municipalities in mainland Finland. The joint service identifies what services unemployed people need to improve their employability and f ind employment. The service draws up an employment plan which includes participation in public employment services, social and health services, and rehabilitation services. The TEO, municipality , or Kela, directs unemployed  people  to the joint service.  The  Act on Multi -disciplinary Employment Services (1369/2014) stipulates that a multi -disciplinary assessment should be conducted: 1) for unemployed people under 25 who have been continuously unemployed for six months; and 2) for unemployed  people  over 25 who  have been unemployed for 12 months. Assessment of progress is conducted every six months. Participation in services terminates when the TEO, municipality , and Kela jointly agree that the need for the services no longer exists.  Sanctions  In order to  get the benefit, the claimant must register with the employment service (TE service). Special requirements are applied to younger applicants. If the unemployed person is 17 and does not have vocational qualifications, they can receive the LMS only for per iods of participation in employment -promoting measures. If the claimant is 18 -24 and does not have vocational qualifications, they are obliged to apply for a study place or participate in training. If the claimant does not apply for a study place or does n ot accept the study place offered, they may lose their entitlement to unemployment benefits. In such a case, entitlement can be restored when: the conditions in respect of vocational qualifications are met; the work requirement is fulfilled; or the claiman t participates in employment -promoting services, undertakes full -time studies, or becomes 25.  Unemployed people can lose their rights to the LMS for a limited period of time if, for example, they refuse to accept suitable jobs. The length of sanctions vari es from 30 to 90 days, depending on the reasons for them. The most common grounds for sanctions are non -attendance at periodic interviews and withdrawal from, or refusal to participate in , a labour market policy measure without a valid reason. Repeated violations result in a more severe sanction: for example in obligatory work, under which unemployed people are not entitled to unemployment benefit before they have been employed, participated in active labour market measures or employment -promoting services , or have  studied full time for at least 90 days.  As regards the recipients of social assistance, non -compliance with , for example, the activation plan can lead to a reduction in  the benefit of  20% for two months. If non -compliance continues, the benefit c an be further reduced by an additional 20%, but for no longer than two months. The maximum reduction is 40%. According to international comparisons, sanctions in the Finnish social assistance system are among the most lenient in Europe (Eleveld, 2016; Pent tilä & Hiilamo, 2017).  An unemployed job -seeker can make use of all the various services offered by TEOs. In co -operation with a TEO expert, an unemployed person will draw up a plan (an employment plan, activation plan, or integration plan for immigrants),  highlighting the job-seeking goals and steps needed to reach those goals. The implementation of the plan is assessed at regular intervals and is individually tailored and adapted to the claimant’s personal needs. However, these plans do not work as effect ively as they might. In particular, the follow -ups to the implementation of the plans have been criticised as ineffective and as increasing the number of unemployed people hit by sanctions (Halmetoja & Korpela, 2020; Sundvall & Meyer, 2018).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  For long -term unemployed people (as recipients of the LMS and social assistance often are), there are various rehabilitative activities available to improve their employability. Additional benefits are paid to those who partake in rehabilitative work  (in the form of sub sistence compensation for LMS recipients and activation benefits for those on social assistance), and they are reimbursed for travel expenses.  Experiences  with activation and sanction measures vary depending on the programme and the target group. Whereas w age subsidies in the private sector have the greatest impact on the subsequent employment and earned income of the participants, wage subsidies in the public and third sectors have only negligible impact. Vocational training has long -term positive effects.  As regards rehabilitative work, employment results are negligible (National Audit Office of Finland, 2020b).  Experiences of the activation model that was in effect in 2018 were mixed. The model increased financial incentives for the unemployed to accept s hort -term jobs or/and to participate in employment -promoting services. The evaluation showed that the model increased participation in employment services. However, the effects of the services were often short -term. The benefit reductions hit the oldest un employed people most severely. TEO personnel regarded the activation model as an ineffective tool for raising the employment rate (Kyyrä et al. , 2019).  3 