Governance mechanisms  Administration of t he RSA  is entrusted t o local authorities . Each authority  is responsible for: financing the RSA (partly from own funds, partly from contributions provided to them by the state) ; leading and managing accompaniment and support measures ; control ling,  and ensuring adherence to,  reciprocal commitments ; and fight ing fraud. The family allowance funds, namely the CAFs ( caisses d’ allocations familiales ) and the MSA (mutualité sociale agricole ), receive, register, and examine requests ; calculate entitlements;  pay out the RSA ; and ensure financial  control.  This decentralised policy suffers from funding problems, with many local authorities  struggling to fund the system – in particular because of COVID -19, as the number of beneficiaries has risen sharply, with no increase in revenue to match  (although  this issue already exist ed). In this context, since 202 2, in Seine Saint -Denis and Pyrénées -Orientales, the management of the RSA has been entrusted to the st ate for a five -year experiment because of the authorit ies’ difficulties in financ ing the RSA. Another experiment will be carried out  from 2023, and for four years  in which local authorities can request to take part  until june 2022. It should a lso be note d that the RSA is nationalised in some overseas local authorities  with a high number of recipients (Guyana, Mayotte, Réunion). There are legal conflicts between some local authorities  and the state, the former claiming financial compensation from the latter in court44. Each local authority  elaborates a n integration plan which sets out  the main lines and orientations of social support for RSA beneficiaries. At the more local level there might  43 2017 DREES data. See Cabannes, P. -Y., Lucile Richet -Mastain, L. (dir.), Calvo, M. (co -ord.)  et al . (2020, septembre).  Minima sociaux et prestations  sociales  – Ménages aux revenus modestes et redistribution  – Édition 2020 . Paris, France : DREES, coll. Panoramas de la DREES -social, in particular Chap. 32 “Orientation and accompaniment of RSA beneficiaries” https://drees.solidarites -sante.gouv.fr/sites/default/fi les/2021 -03/32 -13.pdf   44 “Le RSA fait vaciller les finances départementales [ RSA shakes departmental finances ]", La Gazette des communes, 30 October 2020  https://www.lagazettedescommunes.com/703590/le -rsa-fait-vaciller -les-finances -departementales/   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge  gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   March ,  2022  12  be territorial integration pacts which bring together all th ose acto rs involved in  integration and support who participate in the local  integration plan. There also are PLIEs (local plans for integration and employment) , which cover  the guidance and follow -up of beneficiaries, in close co -operation with the local authority ; local social centres and NGOs are entrusted with social integration plans , while  the PES ( Pôle Emploi ) is in charge of professional integration plans.  Regarding the monitoring and evaluation of the RSA, each year, the DREES publishes detailed national and departmental results, relying on a large and exhaustive survey. The DREES also organises a statistical census of all the data on RSA beneficiaries each month and their socio -demographic data45. In addition, each local authority  should regularl y evaluate its own integration policy.  The ASS  is a tax -financed benefit, which takes over when people exhaust their entitlement to  unemployment benefits financed by unemployment insurance. Funding is provided by the state solidarity fund. The management is carried out by the PES ( Pôle Emploi ). The Pôle Emploi  manages all administrative and monitoring procedures on its own. The DREES organi ses a statistical statement of all the data on ASS beneficiaries each month and o f the socio -demographic data of benef iciaries. In its annual panorama  report  on ‘social minima and social benefits ’, it devotes a page  to detailing the characteristics of people receiving the ASS, their geographical distribution, the number of employees , and the amount of the allowance. It mo bilises several sources: Pôle Emploi , the INSEE employment survey , and the  ‘national inter -regime sample of recipients of additional income from activity and social minima ’ (ENIACRAMS).  The activity bonus  is paid out by family allowance funds (CAF s or MSA)  but its general funding comes from the state. There is no specific service delivery, as no provision of service is involved ; and the activity bonus, which is an automatic top -up income, does not involve any activation measure.  It is monitored and evaluate d by the DGCS, the DREES and the National Family Allowance Funds  (CNAF) .  5 Impact of minimum income  schemes  The activation measures can be assessed by reference to  their outcomes in terms of exit s from  minimum income schemes46. The exit rate from a social minimum thus measured depends on the general context of the labour market, the nature of the minimum income scheme, and  people’s profiles and  distance from employment, which is partly reflected in the type of service received ( type of orientation and type of support).  Out of 100 beneficiaries of the RSA  at the end of 201 9, 75 still received it at the end of 201 9; 4 received another social minimum without touching the RSA ; and 21 left the social minima  schemes . Among those leavi ng, 14 received the activity bonus and 3 received unemployment benefit ( 1 received both).  Out of 100 recipients of  the ASS  at the end of 2017, 67 still received it at the end of 2018 ; 3 received the RSA (without receiving the ASS) ; 2 received the disability allowance ; and 28 no longer received  social minima. 5 of them received unemployment benefit and 7 the activity bonus.   45 https://data.drees.solidarites -sante.gouv.fr/explore/dataset/donnees -mensuelles -sur-les-prestations -de-solidarite/information , https://data.drees.solidarites -sante.gouv.fr/explore/dataset/336_minima -social -rsa-et-prime -d-activite/information    46 The data in this part r ely on : « Minima so ciaux et prestations sociales. Ménages aux revenus modestes et redistribution.  » Panorama de la DREES, 2020. https://drees.solidarites -sante.gouv.fr/sites/default/files/2020 -10/drees_ -_pano_ -_minima_sociaux_ -_assemblage_ -_bat_ -_210920.pdf , “Chap. 21 : Exit out of ‘social minima’”  