Summary  Three minimum income schemes are discussed here , as follows.   The active solidarity income ( RSA ) is the main device which ensures a minimum income. By the end of June 2021 , including  spouses and dependent children, nearly  3,9 million peopl were covered by the RSA –5,7% of the French population. Beneficiaries are required to fol low a type of guidance/accompaniment which is defined according to a prior assessment  – either focused on employment (carried out within the public employment service ) or a more social one  carried out by  local authorities (10 1 “conseils département aux ”), throughout social workers. This accompaniment can be delegate d to local  social organisations. From the point of view of governance, local authorities  manage the system, with different approaches and different financial investments  between them. The rates of exit from the RSA and the rates of return to work remain low. A better co -ordination of actors at the local level is currently being sought through pilot projects aimed at creating a ‘public service for integration and employmen t’.  The specific solidarity allowance (ASS ) is the state -funded scheme which takes over, under certain conditions, when job -seekers reach the end of their entitlement to unemployment benefits. ASS recipients are monitored by the public employment service  as part of the usual support it provides to all job -seekers. This concerns around 350,000 people per year.   Finally, the activity bonus is a means -tested top -up to salaries which is paid to employees and civil servants aged over 18, on request and under cert ain conditions. It acts as an employment incentive for people with low incomes. It is not tied to any particular activation measure.  Still by the end of June 2021, nearly 8,9 million people were covered by the activity bonus, including spouses and children  (some of them can be covered by both this bonus activity and by the active solidarity income). This represents 13% of the French population.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility  criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the ac cess provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlyin g situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education leve l, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 