Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  The initial orientation leads to some beneficiaries being directed  towards support provided by Pôle emploi  (42% of them)  or other organisations of the PES (6%) , and the remainder  towards support provided by the departmental council or other non PES organisatio ns (52%). Each type of support, however, combines measures relating to the search for employment with  other measures  with a more social purpose.  Concerning the PES, four types of support are offered by Pôle Emploi  to all job -seekers, with different levels of intensity. The most intensive are provided more often to RSA beneficiaries than to all job -seekers: 24% benefit from ‘enhanced support ’ (compared with  16%). This type of support involves a reduced number of clients for Pôle Emploi  caseworkers (on averag e in 2014: 56 clients). By contrast, RSA beneficiaries less often have ‘follow -up support ’, which is the least intensive, than all those registered with Pôle Emploi  (17% against 33% ; average casework 181 clients). Among RSA beneficiaries, the most intensive forms of support are more often provided to those with the lowest qualifications or who have recently registered with Pôle Emploi . In 2013, the PES also created a type of support k nown as ‘global support ’. This support method is targeted at job -seekers encountering obstacles (social, economic, etc.) in their search for employment (not necessarily RSA recipients). It is based on the  42 Chareyron S., R. Le Gall, Y. L’Horty. Droits et devoirs du RSA: l’impact des contrôles  sur la participation des bénéficiaires , Rapport de recherche TEPP, 2021. https://hal.arc hives -ouvertes.fr/hal -03240760/document   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge  gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   March ,  2022  11  assessment of job -seekers made by PES advisors (to be distinguished from the ‘orientation’ assessment made by social workers, as seen above). The principle is that of PES advisor s and social worker s from the departmental council  working as pairs . Pôle Emploi  advisor s help define the return -to-work project to enhance the skills of the job -seeker in relation to their  project and employment opportunities. Social advisor s help beneficiaries find solutions to deal with financial, administrative, or legal difficulties related to housing, health, or mobility.  Pôle  Emploi  advisor s and social worker s determine with beneficiar ies the nature and frequency of the appointments  (which depend on their personal situation) . In 2020 , this support concerned 90,000 job -seekers who are also RSA beneficiaries.  Concerning the benef iciaries not oriented towards Pôle emploi  but towards other  organisations, the accompaniment is based on a CER . It stipulates the rights and duties of beneficiaries and can be reassessed when their situation changes (e.g., moving house, or the end of vocat ional training). The content of the measures contained in the CER mainly have  a social aim: 36% of the contracts contain at least one action concerning  access to healthcare, 23% at least one action concerning  the family and parenthood (family support, or childcare) , and 14% at least one action concerned with access to housing/rehousing43. Some of the actions to be implemented by beneficiar ies nevertheless focus on employment integration: 22% of CER s contain at least one measure on employment integration, and 13% contain at least one measure aim ed at  find ing activities, internships or training that promote the acquisition of  vocational skills.  This work assumes close  co-ordination between  social actor s at the local level. Social workers who follow beneficiaries can rely on other actors, for example in the field of health or housing.  In practice, this occurs but there are local differences.  4 