Links with labour market activation  This section will mainly focus on the links between  the RSA  and  labour market activation. Beneficiaries of the RSA are subject  to activation measures ( ‘rights and duties ’) when they are job -seekers or when their average income from professional activity is less than €500 per month . The same rights and duties apply to beneficiar ies and their  spouse s or co -habiting partner s. 99% of beneficiaries are concerned by these measures.  The RSA is managed in France at the level of the  local authority  (departmental council). When RSA beneficiar ies are  subject to such ‘rights and duties ’ measures, their  situation is examined by the de partmental council. On the basis of a n assessment , the most appropriate support  is determined . This is called ‘orientation ’; that is, RSA beneficiar ies  34 Cabannes, P. -Y., Lucile Richet -Mastain, L. (dir.), Calvo, M. (co -ord.)  et al . (2020, septembre).  Minima sociaux et prestations sociales  – Ménages aux revenus modestes et redistribution  – Édition 2020 . Paris, France : DREES, coll. Panoramas de la DREES -social , p. 40 .  35 https://www.service -public.fr/particuliers/vosdroits/F20237   36 The RSA can be combined with several types of income or other social benefits depending on the situation . It therefore can be combined with the ASS. This is paid by Pôle Emploi  and can be paid under the conditions seen above, regarding the claimant (registered job -seeker with no rights left to unemployment insurance, salaried activity of at least five years during the prev ious  10 years ).   37 Cabannes, P. -Y., Lucile Richet -Mastain, L. (dir.), Calvo, M. (co -ord.)  et al . (2020, septembre).  Minima sociaux et prestations sociales  – Ménages aux revenus modestes et redistribution  – Édition 2020 . Paris, France: DREES, coll. Panoramas de la DREES -social, in particular Chap. 3 “The ef fects of social and fiscal transfers on the reduction of monetary poverty ”. Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge  gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   March ,  2022  9  are oriented towards different types of support. According to 202 0 data gathered by the DREES, 83% are e ffectively oriented towards a specific type of support38.  Two different types of support are on offer , as follows.    Vocational guidance: the objective is to find a job. The support is in principle entrusted to the public employment service ( PES ) – most of ten to the Pôle Emploi .  Social orientation: the first step is to resolve th ose person al social difficulties that  are a problem in finding a job;  In any cases , these distinctions remain formal, as both vocational guidance and social orientation  are usually proposed .  In both  cases, the departmental council  is responsible for implementation which it can delegate to s ocial NGOs, social services in  local authorities, or training centres  In total, among those who are oriented towards one of these ty pes of support, 42% are oriented towards the Pôle Emploi  agencies (i.e. vocational guidance) and 58% towards another support organisation (either social or socio -professional support)39. RSA beneficiar ies must go to the organisation chosen by the departmen tal council . When the beneficiaries are oriented towards the PES , they are obliged to register at the PES and undertake the actions necessary for professional integration. In the case of a social or socio -professional orientation, if after one year of supp ort the beneficiary has not been redirected to the PES, his situation must be re -examined by the multidisciplinary team.  Beneficiaries subject to ‘rights and duties ’ sign an individualised contract, either with Pôle emploi  or with  another organization (such as the departmental council, organisations of the PES except Pôle emploi, or other non PES organisations ) On the one hand, beneficiaries oriented towards Pôle emploi  have to sign a personalised project for access to employment ( parcours personnalisé d’accompagnement vers l’emploi  – PPAE). The PPAE represents the general engagement contract that any job -seeker signs when registering at Pôle emploi . RSA beneficiaries therefore do not sign a specific activation contract, different fr om other job -seekers. As part of this support , and based on the personalised project, the PES advisor may use various tools and services, such as access to job offers (in particular to subsidised jobs targeting RSA beneficiaries), access to qualifying trai ning, and advice on job search.  On the other hand, beneficiaries may sign a reciprocal engagement contract ( contrat d’engagement s réciproque s – CER) if they are followed by another organisation and not by Pôle emploi . This contract defines the actions they  must take to justify their integration efforts with their support organisation. In practice, only half of these beneficiaries ( 47% in 2020 ) sign such a contract. The fact that the other half did not sign a contract is generally due to a lack of means in t erms of support  (administration staff and financial resources for implementation) . This is regularly pointed out as a failure in the management of the RSA40. Reports have pointed out the insufficient guidance of RSA beneficiaries towards employment, for th ose oriented towards social guidance. According to the summary report of the consultation on the public integration and employment service in December 202041, the support is not focused enough on employment. This report points out a  38 https://drees.solidarites -sante.gouv.fr/communique -de-presse/rsa -les-beneficiaires -depuis -moins -de-6-mois -plus -orientes -en-2020 -quen -2019  39 See the infography : https://drees.solidarites -sante.gouv.fr/sites/default/files/2020 -12/2020_infographie_minima.pdf .  40 M. Klein, C. Pitollat, L 'accompagnement des bénéficiaires du R SA, report to the Prime Minister, August 2018, https://www.vie -publique.fr/sites/default/files/rapport/pdf/184000587.pdf . 41 Rapport de synthèse de la concertation sur le service public de l'insertion et de l'emploi , Décembre 2020  https://travail -emploi.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/rapport -concertation -spie_decembre_202 0.pdf .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge  gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   March ,  2022  10  ‘professional culture ’ on the part of the actors that is too focused on social barriers rather than employability. According to this report, the proportion  (43% ) of benefit recipients oriented towards Pôle Emploi  in 2018 is insufficient. Similarly , the insufficient emphasis on  job-search measures  is pointed out for those oriented towards  social or socio -professional guidance (i.e. the remaining 57% of beneficiaries). Only a quarter of CERs thus provide for action linked to job search.  The public policy evaluation report of the Cour des Comptes , published in December 2021, mentions the sa me obstacles and difficulties. Only four beneficiaries out of 10 covered by the rights and duties ,  benefit from the support and the contractuali zation of the commitments made. Although the beneficiaries of the benefit are accompanied by other services (NGOs, local missions), this rate is relatively low and does not seem to meet the initial objective of the RSA.  The percentage of people referred shows a l evel of referrals that is too far from the target of 100% of those subje ct to rights and obligations. The rate of orientation in 2019 is 82% at the national level. It is 48% for people who have been receiving benefits for less than six months, 75% for peop le who have been receiving benefits for six months to a year, and it reaches only 88% for people who have been receiving RSA for five years or more, revealing a base of people who have not been oriented in the long term.  Communication difficulties between the various actors are the main obstacles to orienting beneficiaries within a reasonable timeframe. As for the quality of referrals, this depends essentially on the pathways proposed by the territories, without any relation to the socio -economic characteri stics.  If beneficiar ies do not respect the rights and duties framework, sanctions  can be applied following an  examination of the situation by a multidisciplinary team . It is the department that sets the penalties in case of non -compliance with the contract , or even in the event of non -signing of a contract (for example if a beneficiary has not taken steps to register for Pôle Emploi  or to sign a C ER, following the orientation stage). From a statistical point of view, the existence of these sanctions can ind eed lead to an increase in the number  of CER s signed  and in the claimants’ mobilization , but at the same time it can have a negative effect in terms of non -take -up42. 3 