Links with labour market activation  Activation regime  Since subsistence benefit under Social Code Book XII is aimed at those who are temporaril y unable to work, recipie nts are not epected to participate in active labour market  measures . In the case of  basic income support  for job -seekers, labour market activation is an integral part of the scheme (as set out in Social Code Book II ). Recipients are, therefore, obliged to actively look for work and this is combined with access to a range of active labour market measures, including  counselling , training  and job -placement . Non -cooperation with jobcentres over the measures offered can  lead to sanctions being applied in the form of a reduction or loss  of benefit.  (2) Links between employment and ability to work  The primary goal of labour market activation is to help reintegrate recipients of basic income support for jobse ekers into gainful employment as quickly as possible and to end their need for assistance. Every recipient is legally obliged to actively seek a  job and be available to participate in  activation and integration measures. The employment -oriented integration service is tailored to individual needs and involves profiling and case -management procedures , though the actual implementation of these varies  between jobc entres. A central role is played by the integration agreement, in which the mutual tasks and obligations of the person concerned  and the jobc entre are set out and on the basis of which  job-search and  participation in various measures is monitored and, if necessary, sanctioned12. Integration agreement s are intended to be jointly reviewed and updated on a regular basis  in the light of the experience up to that point , but no later than after six months. (e.g. Baethge -Kinsky et al ., 2007; Bartelheimer et al ., 2012; Reis and Siebenhaar, 2015; Brülle et al ., 2016; Bruckmeier et al ., 2020).  In addition to active job search and regular attendance at counselling sessions, integration agreements can include par ticipation in a wide range of active labour -market programmes ( ALMPs ), including  vocational training, work experience , job -search support and subsidised employment as well as  special measures for people with disabilities and access to social services . In order to implement the measures, the jobc entres have entered into cooperation agreements with the municipalities and with providers of special measures ..  Jobc entres receive an annual budget for activation measures and for administration on the basis of certain key figures, while expenditure on social benefits is accounted for on the basis of actual approvals. From the outset, the sufficiency of funding from the Federal Government for basic income support  for job-seekers has been questioned  (see Section 5 .3 below and, for example, Kluve , 2013; Hanesch , 2016). Section 44c of the Social Code  stipulates  the following ratios of staff to the people receiving support for jobc entres:  1:75 for the provision of employment -integration services for benefit claimants who are capable of working and under 25 and 1:150 for th ose of 25 and over . In practice, however, these requirements are not met in many cases . In 2016, for example, only half of the jobc entres in 9 out of 16 Länd er were able to comply with the legal requirements (Schäfer , 2018)13.  12 As noted above, Social Code II contains a whole catalogue of sanctions; these vary according to the type of misconduct and become more severe in the case of repeat offences. Sanctions generally are more severe for those young people under  25. 13 It should be said that deci sions on staffing are devolved to jobcentres and staff  ratios are only one of several criteria on which personnel requirements are determined. Jobcentres, therefore, have responsibility for deciding what staff they need to provide support and how far they are guided in this by the statutory ratios concerned . Commented [A1]: This is currently overturned by a federal constitutional ruling  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   May, 2022  9  A signifi cant expansion in  labour market support through new measures and additional resources for the long -term unemployed and recipients of basic income support for job seekers  was imp lemented  in 2018 under  the Participation Opportunities Act  (Teilhabechan cen gesetz ). Nevertheless, in 2020, on average, only 10% of recipients of basic income support for jobseekers participated in ALMPs ( Bundesagentur für Arbeit , 2021a  and 2021g ). For recipients who were unemployed, the figure was  24% , i.e. still less than a quarter, and , indeed  ,on average the proportion of long -term unemployed participating in  ALMP measures (primarily recipients of basic income support for jobseekers ) was much  smallet than for the short -term unemployed  (primarily receiving unemployment insurance benefits  (Bundesagentur für Arbeit , 2021a  and 2021g ).  (3) Strengths and challenges  Although it has fluctuated a little, the proportion of long -term recipients of income support for jobseekers has remained at around 70%. In December 2020, 2.61 million (68%) of the 3.81 million recipients had been receiving benefits for at least 21 months in the previous 24 . This partly r eflects the fact that that only a minority of recipients are unemployed  in the sense of actively looking for jobs , the others being already employed in low -paid and/ or short -hour jobs or temporarily unavailable for work because of other obligations (see e.g. Bruckmeier et al ., 2015). Activation mea sures, therefore, are only relevant for a relatively small number of benefit recipients, while o ther forms of support may be needed for those in work or with other obligations.  3 