Summary  The minimum income (MI) system in Germany consists of two main schemes for those of working -age , each targeted at  different population  groups.  Since its introduction  on January, 1st 2005 , the basic income support  for job-seekers has been the central benefit scheme with the highest number of benefi ciaries, while the subsistence benefit scheme has played only a marginal role. The schemes are based on the same basic concept: both  are aimed at guaranteeing a subsistence level of income that enables recipients to participate in normal social life and, at the same time,  are designed in principle to help beneficiaries to mobilise their self -help capacity  and to overcome their need for support.   The two MI scheme s are needs -based and means -tested. There is a broad consensus that simplification of the means  test is needed in order to facilitate access to benefits.   The link between benefit receipt and the labour market is a central feature of basic income support  for job-seekers , though there have been issues over the activation concept for many years and the way that it is applied is currently undergoing revision .  While subsistence benefit in the context of social assistance is the sole responsibility of the municipalities  and provided by the local welfare offices , the federal and municipal governments share responsibility for basic income support  for job-seekers. At the same time, there are two different institutional structures for the jobc entres responsible for the provision of benefits and services. They are either run as jo int agencies of the local employment agencies  and the municipalities , or run by the municipalities  alone. At the same time, the internal organisational structures vary greatly between local jobc entres.  Despite positive labour market development s in Germany , the number of recipoents of basic income support for jobseekers has not declined substantially  over recent years . In addition, the scheme  is limited in its impact on the risk of poverty as the cash  benefits received are in most cases below the at-risk -of-poverty threshold. Moreover, recipients of benefi ts are typically dependent on assistance for long period s of time . In response to the COVID -19 crisis, eligibility criteria  were temporarily relaxed to allow more people to receive support . The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place , secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and examine the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits , thirdly, examine the extent o f integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provide d to social services  for the people concerned ; fifthly, summarise  the governance mechanisms in place; and, sixthly , review the evidence on the extent to which the schemes reduce poverty and assist beneficiaries to find work.  Annex 2 outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over rec ent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is oper ating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.   1 