Governance mechanisms  (1) Institutional setting  Subsistence benefit  is regulated by national l egislation  (Sections 27 -40 of Social Code Book XII) and additionally by state implementation laws. It is provided and wholly funded by muniicpalities in their capacity as self -governing en tities14. The provision of benefits and services is carried out by the local social welfare offices.  Basic income support  for job -seekers is regulated by national law (Social Code Book II) and implemented by the Federal Employment Agency and local jobcent res. National monitoring of the job -seekers allowance is carried out by the former . Local jobcentres are either run as joint agencies of the local employment offices  and municipalities  or are by the latter  alone. Funding is provided by the Federal state and the municipalities  (see e.g. Ruschmeier and Oschmiansky, 2010; Hanesch, 2016; and Kaps et al ., 2017).   (2) Governance  Since 2012, a uniform target -management system has been applied in respect of basic income support  for job -seekers – in both cases where employment agencies  and municipalities are responsible and case where the latter operate alone . To achieve the goals set out in the legislation (in Section 48b of Social Code Book II ), target agreements a re concluded annually:    14 Municipalities in Germany currently include 294 districts and independent, or ‘district -free ‘cities, which have the right and responsibility to manage all local affairs.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   May, 2022  11  1. between the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and the Federal Employment Agency, and between the latter and the municipalities and joint institutions ; and  2. between the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and the competent Federal state authorities, and between the latter and the approved municipal agencies.  On the one hand, this means that the goals set by law can be implemented on the basis of a common set of  principles , on the other, it me ans that the performance of the jobc entres can be compared in terms of key figures  and potentially improved .  There are four priority goals  (spelled out in Section 48b of Social Code II ): 1. to reduce the need  for assistance ; 2. to iimprov e integration into gainful employment ; 3. to avod the long -term receipt of benefit s  4. to imporve social participation . For each of the first three goals, a key indicator is defined to judge performance. For the first goal, i t is the annual change in total transfer payments and in total housing and heating costs. For the second goal, it is the integration rate , and for the third, the change in the stock of long -term benefit recipients (BMAS, 2020).  The target -management of basic income support  for job -seekers , however,  has not been the subject of much academic consideration so far  and the indicators used have not play ed a role in  evaluation s either (e.g. Fertig and Felder, 2013; Brülle et al ., 2017).  (3) Monitoring and evaluation  In addition to the political and business management of the Federal Employment Agency and the jobcentres, there is extensive ongoing statistical reportin g on training , and labour market , number and structure of beneficiaries  and other important aspects of basic income support  for job -seekers. The responsibility for these statistics lies with the Federal Employment Agency. Understanding o f the data on the support concerned is difficult . The complex structure of the  underlying legal framework and frequent changes to it  hav e an effect on how the statistic s are structured and hamper straightforward interpretation . In addition, the design of the website is not very user -friendly, which adds to the difficulty .  Since the introduction of the basic income support  for job -seekers  scheme in 2005 , the Institute for Employment Research, which is part of the Federal Employme nt Agency , has the statut ory mandate to evaluate the benefit  scheme and since then has continuously examine d various aspects of th e scheme  and the effects of activation policies  (see, e.g. Heyer et al ., 2014; Harrer, Moczall and Wolff, 2017; Kasrin, Stocki nger and Tübbicke, 2021).   (4) Financing  The costs of the subsistence benefit under Social Code Book XII are borne by the municipalities . In 2018, l ocal government spending on subsistence benefit amounted to EU €845 million , in 2019, it fell to €820 million and in 2020, it rose again to €934 million (see Table 3 in the annex  1). Basic income support  for jobseekers is a joint responsibility of the F ederal Government and municipalities and they share the financi ng, with mun icipalities bear ing the administrative costs of carrying out their responsibilites and the costs of social services , as well as originally all, now only  part , of the cost of reimbursing housing and heating costs, and the Federal Government bear ing the remaining costs (of the benefits themselves , of labour market integration measures, the administrative costs  of carrying out their responsibilities , and parts of the costs of covering housing and Commented [A2]: The Ministry's criticism was wrong because the subsistence benefit is regulated in the Third and not the Fourth Chapter of Social Code XII.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   May, 2022  12  heating  costs ). The Federal Government took over part of the funding of housing  and heating  costs to compensate municipalities for various financial burdens placed on them. The part concerned  has fluctuated from year to year and has varied across  Länder in recent years. In 2018, it average d 49% and  in 2019,  47% . In a move to ease the municipal financial burden  from the Corona virus  pandemic  it was increased to 72.5%  in 2020 and it was 70.5% in 2021 (Wixford , 2016; Boettcher  and  Freier , 2021a and 2021b15). There is no information is available on municipal administrative costs and the costs for social services, so there are no complete statistics on the total costs of basic income support  for job-seekers. The remaining c expenditure on basic income support  for job-seekers was €43,241 million  in 2018 , €43,454 million in 2019 and €44,306 million in 2020 (see Table 4 in the annex  1). 5 