Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  (1) Integration of minimum income scemes with social services  According to Social Code Book XII, it is the responsibility of the local welfare authorities  to assist recipients of subsistence benefit to overcome their need for support. Social services of var ious kinds are provided for this purpose , either directly by the municipalities themselves or by welfare associations  or private  agencies on behalf of these . There are , however,  no statistical data – either at the national or local level – on the provision or use of these services by subsistence benefit  recipients and it may be that the types and extent of services on offer varies between local social welfare offices.  According t o Section 16a of Social Code II, the services concerned are those  “necessary for the integration into working life of the person entitled to benefits who is capable of working ” can be provided  “in order to realise holistic and comprehensive care and suppor t for integration into work ”. They consist of  (1) care for minor s or children  with disabilities and homecare for family members ; (2) debt counselling ; (3) psycho -social care ; and ( 4) addiction counselling.  (2) Access to services and integrated service pro vision  Although under Social Code Book XII, social welfare offices are obliged to take action on their own initiative as soon as they learn of an emergency situation or a need for assistance, the provision of the social services concerned is to some extent discretionary , in the sense that benef it re cipients are not legally entitled to them . There are, however,  except ions , such as the legal entitlement to childcare from a child’s first year up until compulsory schooling. In practice, the scale and range of services provid ed are largely dependent on th e amount of fund ing municipalities are able and willing to devote for the purpose, so there tends to be significant variation in provision between them .  Access to social integration services under Social Code II is usually granted as part of an integratio n agreement , if it is de cided that they can help to improve the chances of Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   May, 2022  10  finding a job . Data on the provision of , and expenditure on , such services , however, are not available in any  detail . For example, the annual report on basic income support  for jobs eekers contains data on these services in an overview of labour market integration measures  in a supplement. This indicatess that i n December 2020, for example, there were 383,326 beneficiaries in ALMPs, but only 39,116 receiving municipal integration serv ices . Accordingly, while, as noted above, around 24% of unemployed recipients of income support for jobseekers participated in ALMPs, only 2.5% received social integration support, though a significant number of jobcentres failed to report data on this (accordig to the Federal Employment Agency , only 64% of jobcentres provided data ). The proportions, therefore, are potenbtially affected  by substantial under -reporting (Bundesagentur für Arbeit , 2021a ). Moreover, in addition to a shirtage of data, there  are no research studies on social integration services and their effects on employment and social integration , which might help to fill the gaps in information (Adamy and Zavaris, 2014; Freier, 2015).  The  Participation Opportunities Act which came into force on 1st of January 2019 , adopted a holistic approach to the integration of receipents of basic income support for jobseekers, creating two new ALMP measures  (§ 16e and § 16i Social Code  II). Both are aimed at getting long -term unemployed benefit recipients into work by having the jobc entres contribute to the ir wage costs  for up to two or five years. The “labo ur market participation” scheme (§ 16i Social Code II) in particular , is directed at long -term unemployed who ar e difficult to place, by provuiding longer -term publicly -subsidised employment , so facilitating their  social participation.  The measures are complemented by comprehensive coaching throughout the period to help stabilise the employment  of the people concern ed. (Inded the primary goal  of the measure is "social stabilisation and participation in the labour market" Bundesagentur für Arbeit , 2021g). The two measures are currently being evaluated , and initial findings are positive ( Bauer et al ., 2021a and 2021b ; Wagner, Castello  and  Schug , 2017;).  However, there remains  a need to improve the recording and evaluation of the social services provided by municipalities to benefit recipients under Social Code s II and XII.    4 