Impact of minimum income schemes  (1) Strengths of MIS and remaining challenges  There is limited evidence on the effect s of the two minimum income schemes intended to provide support for those of working age who are in need. This is particularly the case for subsistence benefits, for which there are little statistical data on recipients, apart from the number of people concerned, and w hat becomes of them and no evaluations which have be en produced (or at least published) on their impact. It is less the case for basic income support for job seekers, for which some data are available  - in particular, on the number of people receiving sup port and their participation in active labour market measures - but for which there is limited information on the effectiveness of the sup port provided in helping people to find employment and to be no longer reliant on income support. Although a number of  evaluations have been undertaken of the impact of different forms of active labour market measure, these have not distinguished basic income support rec ipients from other participants.  The evidence, noted above, that a substantial proportion of such reci pients spend long periods of time in receipt of income support tends to suggest that the measures concerned have had limited success in getting recipients into work (Hanesch, 2016) . Nevertheless, the expansion of employment -oriented services is a positive consequence of the introduction of basic income support  for job -seekers, even though the practical implementation of active measures varies from one jobcentre to another.  Moreover, there are signs of government recognition of the limitations of the two min imum  income schemes. In particular,  in 2018, the Federal  Government implemented the Participation Opportunities Act , introduc ing new measures of support for benefit recipients far removed from the labour market.  In addiiton, there is growing recognition o f the need to alleviate the short an d long -term effects on children of living in households with insufficient resources and there are increasing calls for separate basic income support for them ( Tophoven, Wenzig  and  Lietzmann , 2015 ; Bündnis 90/Die Grünen Bundestagsfraktion, 2019).  The recent announcement of the  governing coalition in Germany, which took office in December 2021, in its coalition agreement (SPD, BÜNDNIS 90/DIE GRÜNEN and FDP, 2021) , of a citizen’s minimum income to replace basic inco me suppor  for jobseekers is more far -reaching . The stated objectives of this are to focus on the employment potential  of recip ients  to help their long -term integration into the labour market and to enable their social participation. The main features are:  15 See also Gesetz zur finanziellen Entlastung der Kommunen und der neuen L änder vom 6. Oktober 2020; Verordnung zur Festlegung und Anpassung der Bundesbeteiligung an den Leistungen f ür Unterkunft und Heizung f ür das Jahr 2021 vom 25. Juni 2021 . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   May, 2022  13   A simplified means -test: in the first two years , the citizen's minimum income  will be paid without taking account of assets and without checking that the costs relating to housing and heating are ‘reasonable’.    The obligation on beneficiaries  of support to cooperate will be redefined by the end of 2022 at the latest, on the  basis of an evaluation of the existing system. Until new legislation is passed, there will be a one -year moratorium on current sanctions applied by jobc entres that  result in  beneficiar ies having income below the subsistence level. Housing benefits will be exempt from sanctions, and beneficiaries under 25 will be treated equally to those aged  25 and over (they are currently subject to tougher sanctions , as noted above ). In the  event of sanctions, they will be offered coaching in coordination with the local youth welfare office.   Sustainable integration into the labour market is intended to be at the centre of the future target -management system, and the steps necessary for this are expected to take social stabilisation and participation into account.   The citizen's  minimum  income is intended to provide individual holistic support. Counsellors and beneficiaries should meet on an equal footing. Strengths and development needs w ill be identified through a competence -assessment procedure, which should also enable  ‘soft skills ’ to be certified. The measures provided will be jointly agreed with the beneficiaries as part of a ‘participation ’ agreement (previously the ‘integration ’ agreement), formulated in simple language. A six -month period of trust will apply. An independent arbitration mechanism for disputes will be put in place.   To ensure tailor -made and holistic support, well  qualified staff at the jobc entres in sufficient numbe rs will be made available through appropriate funding.   The priority of placing people in jobs  as soon as possible , set out in Social Code Book II , will no longer app ly. At present, it is only if a person does not have any vocational qualification s that they are offered the possibility of attending a training course. In future, higher priority will be given to promoting vocational training and further education , with a view to enabling sustainable integration. The time limit on the Participation Opp ortunities Act, which came into force at the beginning of 2019, will be abolished and support for coaching and outreach work will become standard in the citizen’s minimum income s cheme .   Opportunities for combining benefits with earnings will be i extended , with the aim of increasing incentives for employment. Citizens ’ minimum income, housing benefits and, where appropriate, other tax -financed social benefits will be co -ordinated or combined in such a way that the benefit withdrawal rates achieve the most f avourable effects in terms of employment and labour market participation. An independent Expert Commission will be set up to develop the reform model.  (2) Wider impact (national indicators)  The impact of the two minimum income schemes  considered here on indicators of povert y, and in particular, on the at -risk -of-poverty rate is reduced, as indicated above, by the fact that the level of the benefits paid under the two schemes is below the at -risk -of-poverty threshold of 60% of national median income for all household types.  It is also reduced by seem ingly significant non -take -up (Although it is affected by other factors apart from the nature of the minimum income sc hemes, it is relevant to note that the at -risk -of-poverty rate among the unemployed in Germany is among the highest in the EU - 74% in 2019 , as against an EU average of 49% .)  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   May, 2022  14  6 