Summary  Guaranteed Minimum Income (GMI) is a relatively recent addition to the Greek welfare state’s anti -poverty armour.  The programme provides much -needed income support to nearly 4% of the population. Recipients are overwhelmingly located in the lowest decile of the income distribution. Vertical targeting efficiency is good (only one -fifth of all recipients were above the poverty threshold of 40% of median equivalent household disposable income in 2018), but horizontal targeting efficiency is low (two -thirds of all households below the poverty threshold of 40% of median equivalent household disposable income failed to claim the GMI). Stringent income, asset and residence eligibility conditions, possibly compounded by non -take up, limit the effectiveness of the GMI as an anti -poverty device.  From an administrative point of view, the programme is run smoothly. A well -designed information system, effective leadership at the Directorate for the Fight Against Poverty (Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs), and the commitment of staff at municipalities and community centres  ensure the eff icient, streamlined day -to-day operation of the programme. Nevertheless, the interoperability of the GMI information system with the platforms used for other benefits, services and goods remains poor, while the unit managing the GMI information system has been reduced and is now seriously under -staffed.  For the first few years following its introduction in February 2017, the GMI was primarily concerned with income support (Pillar 1). Pillar 2  (supplementary social services)  and Pillar 3 ( labour market activation)  were slow to develop but gathered pace after June 2021. Employment and social reintegration prospects depend partly on the successful development of Pillars 2 and 3, but also on the recovery of the economy from the C OVID -19 lockdowns and  the deep recession of the 2010s.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other  benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in p lace; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes  that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context  in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.   1 