Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their sex, age, emplo yment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 Description of nationa l schemes providing minimum income support  Income compensation  is primarily rights -based, i.e. anyone who meets the prescribed criteria and conditions receives the benefit. Regulations on expense compensation  provisions are mostly prepared by the various local governments and vary substantially , with some exceptions, for example the public health care card system (közgyógyellátás) . The contribution -based unemployment benefit (now called job -seek er benefit  (álláskeresési járadék )) is available for a maximum of 90 days, the shortest in the European Union (EU). Its amount is capped at 100% of the effective minimum wage. After 90 days, unemployed people may apply only for the benefit for persons  of active age. The national legal fra mework for this is Act III of 1993 on Social Administration and Social Benefits, and Regulation 63/2006 on the detailed rules of claiming, establishing and the payment of social benefits in cash and in kind. The minimum income scheme (MIS) was significantl y altered from 1 January 2009, following a parliamentary decision of 15 December 2008 (341/2008. (XII.30.) and a Government Decree modifying social and employment legislation (2008. CVII. Law) within the framework of the Pathway to Work programme. A number  of changes and further restrictions have since been made.  According to the government officials interviewed, the picture of the support system based on the benefit for pe rsons  of active age is highly distorted, as the most deprived people include substan tial numbers living in family households and supported by additional regular benefits related to the upbringing, care and nursing of children. Statistics from the Central Statistical Office (KSH) show1 that regular child -related benefits are comparable to  working -age benefits, both in terms of the numbers of beneficiaries and the amount per person. According to government officials’, several elements of the social assistance system are taken into account. For example, the phenomenon of in -work poverty, lar ge regional and jobseeker group disparities, and the lack of jobs, which means that the jobseekers’ allowance system (linked to work experience and contribution -based) still does not offer many people a livelihood. In addition, they explained that the key objective of maintaining long -term employability and securing livelihoods makes public works the only realistic alternative for the most vulnerable. Government officials highlighted that the decade -long high rates of long -term unemployment and inactivity h ave recently reduced, and that overly generous supports might reverse favourable labour market trends. For the most vulnerable, the realistic labour market alternative is undeclared work, which threatens individual and family livelihoods, both because of i ts precariousness and the low level of disposable income. Government officials observed that ‘normative subsidies often violate the principle of subsidiarity, which is particularly important in terms of equity, accessibility, fairness of distribution, etc. ’. They believed that the types of income and benefit -in-kind needed for subsistence should be examined more broadly and include more elements (all forms of social security), noting that ‘thus the figures in the online database prepared for this study are fragmented and do not reflect the functioning of the system’.  The benefit for persons  of active age ( aktív korúak ellátása ) is split into two separate categories: i) employment substituting benefit (ESB) ( foglalkoztatást helyettesítő támogatás ), received by those capable of working and of active age, when not working  1 https://www.ksh.hu/stadat_files/szo/en/szo0021.html   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  on a public works project, and ii) social assistance (for those of active age and incapable of work), i.e. a benefit for people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child ( egészs égkárosodási és gyermekfelügyeleti támogatás ). The entitlement to minimum income (MI) benefits is not time -limited but remains available as long as the eligibility conditions are met. At least once a year, the district office audits entitlement in respect of the ESB and, if the eligibility conditions are met, the provision continues. In addition to the recipient’s financial circumstances, they consider whether the recipient has participated in work activities for at least 30 days in the preceding 12 months.  In order to maintain eligibility, 30 days of work must be certified, but the law does not specify that it must be a full -time activity. Eligibility for the benefit for people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child is examined every two y ears. The amount of this latter provision was increased by 3% from January 2018.  No adaptations were made to benefit levels in response to the COVID -19 pandemic. However, where revision of the entitlement fell due during the COVID -19 state of emergency, t hat revision has been postponed to the end of the second month after the end of the emergency. On 24 November 2021, the state of emergency was extended to 31 May  2022.  The lack of regular monitoring of the take -up and effectiveness of social provisions reflects the arbitrary link with the statutory minimum for old -age pensions, which has remained unchanged since 2008. The adequacy of MIS provisions has not been researched, neither are they tied to any poverty level nor indexed.  1.1  Eligibility  Means testing m eans that the applicant is entitled to the benefit for pe rsons in  active age if the family has no possessions and the per -consumption -unit net family income does not exceed 90% of the statutory minimum old-age pension, HUF 25  650 (EUR 70)2a month since  January 2008 . Income is all money defined as such by the law on personal income tax, including tax -free income and income on which simplified entrepreneurial tax or simplified public duty contribution must be paid. Family allowance, orphan’s allowanc e and child maintenance must be taken into account as income of the person to whom it is paid.  The family is narrowly defined as a ‘nuclear’ family or, more specifically, the head of the family, their spouse or cohabiting partner, and children below the ag e of 20 years with no independent income (the age limit is 23 years for a child attending secondary school; 25 years for a child in higher education; and there is no age limit for permanently sick, autistic or disabled children, provided their condition ex isted before they turned 25). The eligibility of any person over 18 years of age and living in the same household as their parents is independent of their parents’ income, i.e. if an adult child still lives with their original family, the parents’ income i s not taken into account and they are instead considered a separate household. Income is defined in net terms, i.e. after deducting recognised expenses (expenses recognised in Act CXVII of 1995 on Personal Income Tax and child support) and payment obligati ons (taxes and contributions). No basic costs – other than child support – are excluded.  The period used to calculate regular monthly income is the income of the month immediately preceding the claim. The period considered for irregular income is the avera ge monthly income in the 12 months preceding the claim, or, if the period is shorter than 12 months, the monthly average income for the real period of activity.  The following types of income are excluded from the means test for the benefit for persons  in a ctive age:   2 The exchange rate applied in this report is 365 HUF/ EUR.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  Expenses defined as such by the personal income tax law and any child maintenance paid;   Certain benefits: extraordinary local benefit ( rendkívüli települési támogatás ), local benefit supporting the costs of home maintenance, medication and debt  management, irregular child protection support ( rendkívüli gyermekvédelmi támogatás ), the component of the regular child protection allowance provided in vouchers ( rendszeres gyermekvédelmi kedvezmény ), fees and allowances paid to foster parents ( nevelési  díj és külön ellátmány ), birth grant ( anyasági támogatás ), pension premium ( nyuddíjprémium ), one -time provison ( egyszeri juttatás ), 13th month pension ( 13. havi nyugdíj ), 13th month provision (13.havi ellátás ), a jubilee grant ( szépkorúak jubileumi juttat ása), in -cash transportation allowance for the mobility -impaired ( súlyos mozgáskorlátozott személyek pénzbeli közlekedési kedvezményei ), personal annuity for the blind (vakok személyi járadéka ), disability support ( fogyatékossági támogatás ), assignment  given to volunteers ( az önkéntesnek biztosított juttatás ), and energy support ( energiafelhasználáshoz nyújtott támogatás );   Income from some forms of employment: monthly income from occasional work, carer’s fee in the framework of domestic assistance ( házi se gítségnyújtás keretében kapott tiszteletdíj ) and tax -free income received as a member of a social cooperative;   For public employment, only the amount of employment replacement benefit (HUF 22  800  (62.5 EUR ) is taken into account as income.   Income from t he sale of real estate where the claimant lives, or from the rights connected to this real estate, for a period of one year after the sale;   Cancelled debt, ceased duty, a vehicle used to transport a mobility -impaired person, regular income ceased before s ubmittance of the claim, and income from an activity that has already ended.  The claimant is not entitled to the benefit if their family property exceeds the limit defined by law, i.e. the value of one piece of property cannot be more than 30 times greate r than the statutory minimum of the old -age pension ( öregségi nyugdíj minimum ) (HUF 855  000) (EUR 2  343), or the value of the whole property cannot be more than 80 times the minimum old -age pension (HUF 2  280  000) (EUR 6  247 )). Property includes usable rea l estate, the rights associated with that real estate, and vehicles. Every asset belonging to family members is taken into account, using the full value declared by the claimant. In case of disputes, the tax authority sets the value. There is no obligation  to sell/rent/resize the property, but if the value exceeds the limit, the claim is rejected.  NGO experience3 suggests that in evaluating applications, district offices may disregard the fact that  only  assets that can be utilised could be taken into accou nt to reject applications or abolish previous eligibility. Instead, they prescribe payback, due to considering property used by others or with usufruct, or in case of owning a small share of a property. While this practice is against the law, not all claim ants can enforce their rights, despite claims made in court. The right to appeal an administrative decision has ceased to exist, and the only remaining recourse for an unfair decision is to go to court.  The two types of provisions for the benefit for pe rsons in  active age differ primarily in respect of fitness to work.  The ESB is open to people capable of undertaking work, who must then register and cooperate with the PES. Their entitlement to the ESB is terminated if they are deleted  3 Information collected through consultation with an NGO on 14 October 2021.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  from the registry of jobseekers by their own fault, if they refuse a proper job offered, if they are found to be working illegally (for the second time), or if they cannot prove pursuit of a gainful activity, training programme or labour market programme for at least 30 days i n the preceding 12 months. The person must not be engaged in any gainful activity, which excludes public employment, a simplified employment relationship in seasonal work or occasional work, or domestic employment. Payment of the benefit is suspended durin g the first 120 days of gainful activity, but the entitlement does not cease until the 121st day of gainful activity.  Those eligible for the benefit for people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child are people who have a health impairment , i.e. who have lost at least 67% of their work capacity, have a health impairment of at least 50%, or whose health status does not exceed 50%, based on a complex evaluation by the rehabilitation authorities, or who receive a blind person’s allowance or su pport for people with disabilities. Those raising a child under 14 years old whose attendance at a day -care institution is not ensured are also eligible.  There is no  information on how the eligibility criteria were chosen, and they seem unlikely to be based on studies or evaluations . According to government officials, there is only limited scope for uniform  and central distribution of the level and conditions of benefits, given the large regional differences and variation between jobseeker groups . This reasoning does not explain the lack of transparent, empirically grounded (e.g. linked to poverty limits) cr iteria.  1.2  Coverage  KSH data show that, on 31 December 2020, 113  689 persons were entitled to the ESB and 19  407 were entitled to the benefit for people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child . According to the PES, in 2020, 70  545 received t he ESB (stock data)4. In 2020, there were 90  258 applications for the ESB, of which 14  315 were rejected (16%). KSH data show that there were 6  131 applications for the benefit for people suffering from health  problems or taking care of a child, of which 1 184 were rejected (19%). No information is available on the reasons for rejection.  Only qualitative (interview) evidence could be collected on non -take up.  The strict eligibility criteria may exclude a significant group but there is no publicly availabl e evidence. However, the NGOs interviewed suggested that, in their experience, significant numbers of people in need cannot access these provisions. Despite the current income threshold being so low, a share of people living below the official Eurostat at -risk -of-poverty (AROP) line (60% of median household income) are not eligible for the benefit. NGOs also noted that the conditions on health status are too restrictive5. As tax -free income is taken into account, the benefit may be withdrawn from people wh o occasionally receive small donations from acquaintances6 in order to make ends meet.   Another excluded group consists of those who are unaware of the benefits or cannot claim them without help. Even if service providers try to help them, most staff at PES or government offices have no training on dealing with people from disadvantaged backgrounds, those with multiple problems who struggle to understand or read the relevant regulations and application forms, or those who lack the necessary, albeit small -scale, means to acquire them. These social support services are available only to a fraction of the population in need, exacerbated by a lack of capacity within the  4 Source: Ministry of Innovation and Technology.  5 Information collected through consultation with NGOs on 13 and 14 October 2021.  6 The interviewed lawyer referred to a case where the annual revision found that the recipient had received several transfers of around EUR 30 each from acquaintances to help them to pay to stay in a hostel -type of homeless shelter. As a resu lt, he had to repay the benefit. This may be rare – and indeed the PES said that check -ups are rarely so thorough and only occasionally check bank accounts, etc.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  family support services. However, the PES has recently begun to provide social information,  suggesting a positive shift in this respect.  Activation conditions (e.g. ESB recipients cannot reject public works offers) may also prevent people from taking -up the benefit, perhaps because of poor health (although they do not qualify for the benefit fo r people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child), or because they cannot reconcile paid work and their caring responsibilities for children or adult family members. Women with low education levels are often expected to take up shift work,  which is impossible without other family members to take care of their children. The current childcare system is not sufficiently flexible to provide workable solutions7￼  Another reason for non -take -up may be indebtedness. This happens where people do not wish to be legally employed because a significant proportion of their income would be automatically deducted to cover their debts. Instead, they choose to pay their own health contributions and to work illegally8. 1.3  Adequacy  The levels of the benefit for  persons in active age are set arbitrarily and are not tied to a poverty threshold. The monthly amount of the benefit for people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child  (BSH)  is the difference between the family income limit (sum of the co nsumption units of the household, multiplied by 95% of the statutory minimum pension9) and total family income, with the amount capped at 90% of the net minimum wage for public works. The adjustment to family income is tied to the arbitrarily set level of  the statutory minimum of the old -age pension. Family encompasses close relatives residing at the same (registered) address (spouse, domestic partner, a child under 20 years of age without any independent income, a child under 23 years of age without any i ndependent income and pursuing full -time study, a child under 25 years of age without any independent income and pursuing full-time study in an institution of higher education, and a child who is permanently ill or disabled, irrespective of their age). The  benefit can be claimed by any family member, but only one person can be eligible for the benefit for persons in active age, except where two claimants are entitled to different cash benefits (one entitled to the ESB, and the other to benefit for people su ffering from health problems or taking care of a child). The monthly amount of benefit for people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child is calculated as follows:  SA = ( 0.95*minimum old -age pension*consumption unit) – household monthly income.  The consumption unit is as follows: the first adult: 1.0 (+ 0.2, if they are a single parent), spouse or partner: 0.9, first and second child: 0.8, third and other children: 0.7, d isabled child: 1.0 (if there are disabled and healthy children, the first healthy child counts as 0.8). If the first adult or the spouse (partner) is receiving disability support ( fogyatékossági támogatás ), they count 1.0+0.2, or 0.9+0.2.  The eligibility entitlement is reviewed at least every two years and the amount may change slightly depending on income. Adjustments are ad hoc rather than on an annual/periodic basis. In 2019, for a single beneficiary without a family, the maximum amount per month was HU F 27  075 (EUR 74), while for a whole family (irrespective of the number of children), the total amount was capped at HUF 48  795 (EUR 134) per month. That figure remained unchanged in 2020 but increased to HUF 50  875 (EUR 139) in 2021.   7 Information collected through consultation with the PES on 27 October 2021.  8 Information c ollected through consultation with the PES on 27 October 2021.  9 Until 28 February 2015, it was 90% of the statutory minimum pension.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  The level o f the ESB  is set arbitrarily, using a method that is neither transparent nor predictable. As a fixed benefit, the amount does not depend on family size, composition or income. Those who receive the ESB may be employed as public  work s scheme  workers  (they cannot ref use and continue to claim the ESB) and the wage for public work s scheme could thus be considered a kind of social provision and part of the MI scheme. However, the scope of the public works scheme has been reduced significantly in recent years in line with  EU recommendations, raising doubts about the access of all ESB beneficiaries to public works opportunities.  Entitlement is reviewed at least once a year by the district office. If the eligibility conditions are met, the provision continues. In addition to  the recipient’s financial circumstances, the review looks at the recipient’s participation in 30 days of work activities in the previous 12 months. In order to maintain their eligibility, 30 days of work must be certified, although not necessarily full -time. The amount of the benefit depends on the statutory minimum of old -age pensions ( öregségi nyugdíj ).  Table 1 presents the income of different household types with different mixes of MIS benefits and the share of that income compared to relative poverty indices and the gross and net minimum wage, based on data from 2020. In the case of families with children, the adequacy of benefits is significantly better than for single people or even couples without children. Nevertheless, the benefit levels often lag  far behind the national at risk of poverty threshold. The amount of the ESB is clearly inadequate, for example, at only 21.6% of the 60% of median income threshold, 32.4% of the extreme AROP threshold, and 21.3% of the net minimum wage. The amount of bene fit for people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child and therefore unable to work is slightly larger.  Employment as public wor ks scheme  workers , which can be considered part of the MIS, increases adequacy significantly, but these people  work full -time and are thus part of the employed population, raising the issue of in -work -poverty. Even in the most favourable case, for a family with two earners in public  works and two children, the family income is only 79.1% of the 60% of median incom e threshold and amounts to slightly more than one and a half net minimum wage. Table 1 suggests that the amount of provision is both very low and inadequate. The level of MI benefits was found to be inadequate as far back as 2009 (Albert, 2009) and has sin ce deteriorated further, with a nominal decrease in certain provisions (e.g. the ESB in 2012) and the abolition of others (e.g.  home maintenance support ). Child -related benefits are significant, but particularly for those in employment. As the local benefi ts for compensation  of expenses are regulated at municipal level, nationally valid calculations are not possible.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  Table 1.  Net monthly provisions, including family allowance, and their ratio to the national AROP threshold  (60% of median income), the national extr eme AROP threshold (40% of median income), gross minimum wage (of a single earner), and income of a minimum wage earner (single household), in HUF, 2020   Relative poverty thresholds (HUF/month) – 60/40% of median income  Provisions  Nominal value  % of national AROP threshold (60% of median income)  % of national extreme AROP threshold (40% of median income)  % of gross minimum wage of single earner  % of income of minimum wage earner (single household) Single person  105  369/ 70 246  ESB  22 800  21.6%  32.4%  14.1%  21.3%  BSH  27 075  25.7%  38.5%  16.8%  25.3%  PW 54 217  51.45%  77.2%  33.7%  50.6%  Single person with two children  168  590/ 112  393  BSH +2FA  48 795+ 29 600 =78  395  46.5%  69.7%  48.7%  73.2%  PW +2FA  80 307 + 29 600 =109  907  65.2%  97.8%  68.3%  102,60%  Couple without children  158  054/ 105  369  1 ESB +1 BSH  48 795  30.8%  46.3%  30.3%  45.6%   2 PW  54 217x2 = 108  434  68.6%  102.3%  67.3%  101.2%  Couple with 2 children  221  275/ 147  517  1ESB +1BSH+ 2 FA 48 795+ 26 600 =75  395  34.1%  51.1%  46.8%  70.4%  FHT+PW + 2 FA  22 800+ 74 217 + 26 600 =129  707  58.6%  87.9%  80.6%  121.1%  2 PW+2 FA  148  435+ 26 600 =175  035  79.1%  118.6%%  108.7%  163.5%  Couple with 3+ children  252  886/ 168  590  Childcare assistance + ESB+3 FA  28 500 + 22 800+ 48 000 =99  300  39.3%  58.9%  61.7%  92.7%  BSH + ESB+3 FA  48 795+ 48 000 =96  795  38.3%  57.4%  60.1%  90.4%  ESB + PW+3 FA  22 800 + 80 307+ 59.7%  89.6%  93.8%  141.1%  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9   Relative poverty thresholds (HUF/month) – 60/40% of median income  Provisions  Nominal value  % of national AROP threshold (60% of median income)  % of national extreme AROP threshold (40% of median income)  % of gross minimum wage of single earner  % of income of minimum wage earner (single household) 48 000 =151  107  Note: ESB = employment substitute benefit; BSH = benefit for people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child and are therefore unable to work; PW = public works (net amount, depending significantly on the number of children due to the family tax refund); FA = family allowance.   1.4  Links with other benefits  The  recipients of the benefit for pe rsons  in active age are entitled to free health services but have no special healthcare entitlement. Those in social need may qualify for the public healthcare card10, which contributes towards the cost of medicines, medica l aids and medical treatment for medical rehabilitation. Those people, who are entitled to some other provisions (disability benefit in case of health status not more than 30%; higher amount of family allowance , a benefit for people suffering from health p roblems or taking care of a child  etc.), receive the public health care card automatically  (the social need is not examined ). Beneficiaries are entitled to reduced local transport fees, which is especially significant in bigger cities. The rate of reductio n varies depending on the municipality . No general housing scheme exists in Hungary. Local governments can provide financial aid to support housing costs in the form of the local benefit ( települési támogatás ), a single provision that replaced the previous normative  home  maintenance support. Since 1 March 2015, t he forms, eligibility criteria and amount of allowances provided in the framework of local benefit  are determined and financed by local government , meaning that the conditions and scale of t he service are no longer transparent. Mózer (2016) analysed the ‘low income’ eligibility criteria across a sample of local measures, and identified 16 different sets of criteria. Various analyses of the impact of the 2015 reform concluded that, although th e total number of recipients did not change, the real value of the provisions has fallen significantly, especially in  10 The public health card is an in -kind provision to help socially deprived pe ople to reduce t heir out-of-pocket expenses for maintaining and recovering their health. The regulation is quite complex, but relevant details are noted here. T he benefit can be claimed on three  grounds: as a universal, or normative or equitable benefit.  A person with a disab ility who is entitled to the benefit for people in active age is entitled to the universal benefit . A person is entitled to a normative allowance if the recognised reimbursement of the cost of regular monthly medical care exceeds 10% of the minimum amount of the old -age pension (HUF 2  850 /EUR 7.80 ), provided that the monthly income per person in the family is less than 105% of the minimum amount of the old -age pension (HUF 29  925 /EUR 82 ) or 155% if the person lives alone (HUF 44  175 /EUR 121). The individual  drug benefit can only be granted if the cost of the drug exceeds HUF 1  000 /EUR 2.70  per month, and the maximum amount of the drug benefit cannot currently exceed HUF 1 2 000 /EUR 33  per month (the maximum monthly amount of the drug benefit is set by the ann ual Central Budget Act for new a pplications for public health insurance cards in a given year). In determining the cost of the medicine, the lowest cost per month appropriate to the applicant's chronic illness, and the first choice, acc ording to medical ru les, with the lowest daily therapeutic cost, is taken into account.  Medicines that are not prescribed by a specialist may be taken into account in the calculation of the cost of medicines , up to a maximum of HUF 6  000 per month. If the monthly cost of medi cines exceeds HUF 6  000 /EUR 16.50 , the amount above HUF 6  000 may be calculated by taking into account medicines prescribed only by a specialist or on the advice of a specialist. Medical devices may be dispensed by the distribut or and medical benefits by the provider if the prescription is endorsed with the patient's public health card number by the prescriber.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  smaller settlements and in the most deprived areas. The change was most severe for housing -related provisions, with the number of those re ceiving such support decreasing by 44% (Kopasz and Gábos, 2018). Previous studies concluded that local provisions are less targeted at the poorest population segment and provide less support, while discretionary elements are more abundant and the transpare ncy of the allocation of provisions often decreases significantly (Mózer, 2016; Kováts, 2015).  An analysis by the think tank, Policy Agenda, indicates a 36% decline in expenditure for social provisions over a four -year period (2014 -2017). They looked at th e national distribution of provisions and compared (disregarding Budapest) county districts for their per capita income by taxpayers and found that both the best and worse  performers were negatively affected by the reformed system of social provision. Cash  provisions in the best situated district decreased by 43%, compared to a reduction by 55% in the worst situated district. The change was difficult to justify from a budgetary perspective, as the amount saved amounted to just 0.08% of total budget expendit ure11. From 1 July 2020, Budapest, which houses one -fifth of Hungary’s population, reintroduced the home maintenance support12.  Certain types of universal family provisions should be noted. Universally available support includes several cash benefits, not ably family allowance, childcare allowance (GYES), child -raising support (GYET), and maternity support. Family benefits play a very significant role in alleviating the financial situation of the poorest families with children. The amount of family allowanc e depends on the number of children, whether the child (children) is (are) raised by a single parent, and whether the child is disabled.  A person can also be excluded from public works if the authorities find them responsible for the truancy of their chil d. From September 2015, compulsory kindergarten attendance was introduced for children aged 3 years and older. If a child is unjustifiably absent from kindergarten for 20 days, the family allowance is withdrawn.  To compensate for the financial burden of h aving children, women who give birth to a child after participating in the pregnancy care programme at least four times are entitled to a lump -sum maternity grant of 225% of the minimum pension (300% for twins). The GYES is a flat benefit paid to parents w ho remain out of the labour market13 until their child is three years old (or 10 years old in the case of permanently ill or severely disabled children), or to grandparents who look after their grandchildren between the ages of one and three years in the p arents’ household. In the case of twins, this support is paid until the children reach school age (usually six years). The amount of the allowance is the same as the minimum pension ( in the case of twins it is multiplied by the number  of twins).  Parents w ho raise three or more children in their own homes (with the youngest aged between three and eight years) and who work a maximum of four hours a day are eligible for the GYET. The monthly amount of this support is the same as the minimum pension, regardles s of the number of children.  The regular child protection benefit is a passport -type benefit, which establishes entitlement to free or low -cost preschool  and  school meals, depending on family income. In the framework of regular child protection benefit  a benefit  in cash  is provided twice a year. The amount of the benefit  in cash  is 2x HUF 6  000 (EUR 16.4) in case of children who are not disadvantaged or multiple disadvantaged, and 2x HUF 6 500 (EUR 17.8) in case of children who are disadvantaged or multipl e disadvantaged.   11 https://www.policyagenda.hu/elemzesek/2018/szocialis -rendszer -valtozasanak -hatasai/#.W8d1UhMzZmB  12 https://budapest.hu/Lapok/2020/ujr aindul -a-fovarosi -lakasrezsi -tamogatas.aspx  13 GYES is paid either from the birth of the child (if the parent is only eligible for this non -contributory, universal benefit) or from the end of non -universal benefits, from the age of 2 of the child.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  Provided under the Act XXXI of 1997 Act on the Protection of Children and Guardianship Administration, it is a key means of support for children living in difficult circumstances. 80,000 families in poverty lost their entitlement to this b enefit  between 2012 and 2014 as a result of (among other things) an increase in the minimum wage, which itself did little to significantly improve their living conditions (Farkas, 2015). The eligibility criteria for regular child protection benefit remain ed unchanged between 2008 and 2017, which saw significant numbers of poor children lose their eligibility. In 2018, as the amount of the minimum pension had still not been increased, the eligibility criteria for child protection benefit were modified sligh tly, with eligible income levels increasing from 130 -140% of the minimum pension to 135 -145%.  All children in public education receive textbooks free -of-charge. Every municipality is obliged to provide a free warm lunch as the main meal for children in nee d during the autumn, spring and summer holidays, provided their parents have claimed their eligibility. This service can be considered as a good practice, as it reaches a high proportion of children from low -income families.  Recipients of the ESB may be employed as public workers and cannot refuse such work if they wish to continue claiming their entitlement. The wage for public work s scheme could therefore be considered a kind of social provision and part of the MIS.  Child h ome care fee  (GYOD)  for parents taking care of their permanently ill or severely disabled children, reliant on care  is not a means -tested  benefit . In 2021, it was increased to 88% of the minimum wage (HUF 147  312 (EUR 404 )) and will reach the minimum wage in 2022. (In the case of more than one eligible child, it is 1.5 times this amount.)  Nursing fee  (ápolási díj) is  paid to people who provide long -term care for seriously disabled or permanently ill family members. The aim of the benefit is to compensate th e lost inc ome of those who cannot perform  full time gainful activity because of nursing their relatives.  The amount of the benefit depends on the health state of the care recipient . [Basic nursing fee -HUF 43  405  (EUR 119) ; Nursing fee provided in case of a n increased need of nursing  – HUF 65  110  (EUR 178) ; Nursing fee provided to the carers of relatives of the most severe status  – HUF 78  130  (EUR 214) ]. It is important to note that beneficiaries of benefit for persons in active age  cannot be entitled to chi ld home care fee (GYOD) or nursing fee (ápolási díj).   2 