Summary  In Hungary, the benefit for pe rsons  of active age  (aktív korúak ellátása)  is split into two separate categories: i) employment substituting benefit (ESB) ( foglalkoztatást helyettesítő támogatás ), received by those who are capable of working and of active age, when not working on a public works project, and ii) social assistance  (for those of active age and incapable of work), i.e. a  benefit for people suffering from health problems or taking care of a child ( egészségkárosodási és gyermekfelügyeleti támogatás ). These can be considered minimum income schemes (MIS), supplemented with other linked benefits, especially for families with children. The entitlement to minimum income (MI) benefits is not time limited but remains available for as long as the eligibility conditions are met.  A key challenge for current MIS is that the levels  of the benefit for persons in active age are arbitrarily set and not tied to a ny poverty threshold. Amounts are not regularly adjusted and there is no predetermined method for indexation. As a result, the level of the ESB has not changed since 2008, as th e level  is  tied to the statutory minimum of the old -age pension the amount of which has not changed since 2008 . As well as making the provision increasingly less adequate,  its relative percentage was decreased to 80% of the statutory minimum of the old -age pension in 2012. As a fixed benefit, its amount does not depend on family size, composition or income.   No change has been made to the existing scheme in light of the CO VID -19 pandemic.  The focus on labour market integration is very strong, while the level of provision is so low that participation in the public works scheme is not only legally compulsory but it is indispensable to making ends meet. Labour market activatio n is not formally linked to MIS  or supported by social services, irrespective of beneficiaries’ situations. Although there are no  studies on MIS beneficiaries, in terviews with representatives from the  public employment  services (PES) and non -governmental organisation (NGO) highlight multiple disadvantages that require systematic inclusion of social service providers. The representative from the  PES confirmed that  recently councillors started to provide information about social services , suggesting a posit ive shift in this direction.  The lack of regular monitoring of take -up and effectiveness  of social provisions may reflect the arbitrary linking of social provisions to the statutory minimum for old -age pensions. The adequacy of MIS provisions has not been  researched, and they are neither tied to any poverty level nor indexed.  Given the income of different household types with a different mix of MIS benefits  and their relation to poverty thresholds, MIS benefits are inadequate, despite the fact that all be neficiaries receive free healthcare, may use local transport with reduced charges, and, if they have children, are eligible for a number of linked benefits (e.g. family allowance, if participating in public works, family tax refunds). The level of MI benef its was found to be inadequate as far back as 2009 (Albert, 2009). The situation has continued to deteriorate, with a nominal decrease in certain provisions (e.g. amount of the employment substitute benefit in 2012) and the abolition of others (e.g.  home maintenance support )– replaced by the local benefit  in 2015.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provide d and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their sex, age, emplo yment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 Description of nationa l schemes providing minimum income support  Income compensation  is primarily rights -based, i.e. anyone who meets the prescribed criteria and conditions receives the benefit. Regulations on expense compensation  provisions are mostly prepared by the various local governments and vary substantially , with some exceptions, for example the public health care card system (közgyógyellátás) . The contribution -based unemployment benefit (now called job -seek er benefit  (álláskeresési járadék )) is available for a maximum of 90 days, the shortest in the European Union (EU). Its amount is capped at 100% of the effective minimum wage. After 90 days, unemployed people may apply only for the benefit for persons  of active age. The national legal fra mework for this is Act III of 1993 on Social Administration and Social Benefits, and Regulation 63/2006 on the detailed rules of claiming, establishing and the payment of social benefits in cash and in kind. The minimum income scheme (MIS) was significantl y altered from 1 January 2009, following a parliamentary decision of 15 December 2008 (341/2008. (XII.30.) and a Government Decree modifying social and employment legislation (2008. CVII. Law) within the framework of the Pathway to Work programme. A number  of changes and further restrictions have since been made.  According to the government officials interviewed, the picture of the support system based on the benefit for pe rsons  of active age is highly distorted, as the most deprived people include substan tial numbers living in family households and supported by additional regular benefits related to the upbringing, care and nursing of children. Statistics from the Central Statistical Office (KSH) show1 that regular child -related benefits are comparable to  working -age benefits, both in terms of the numbers of beneficiaries and the amount per person. According to government officials’, several elements of the social assistance system are taken into account. For example, the phenomenon of in -work poverty, lar ge regional and jobseeker group disparities, and the lack of jobs, which means that the jobseekers’ allowance system (linked to work experience and contribution -based) still does not offer many people a livelihood. In addition, they explained that the key objective of maintaining long -term employability and securing livelihoods makes public works the only realistic alternative for the most vulnerable. Government officials highlighted that the decade -long high rates of long -term unemployment and inactivity h ave recently reduced, and that overly generous supports might reverse favourable labour market trends. For the most vulnerable, the realistic labour market alternative is undeclared work, which threatens individual and family livelihoods, both because of i ts precariousness and the low level of disposable income. Government officials observed that ‘normative subsidies often violate the principle of subsidiarity, which is particularly important in terms of equity, accessibility, fairness of distribution, etc. ’. They believed that the types of income and benefit -in-kind needed for subsistence should be examined more broadly and include more elements (all forms of social security), noting that ‘thus the figures in the online database prepared for this study are fragmented and do not reflect the functioning of the system’.  The benefit for persons  of active age ( aktív korúak ellátása ) is split into two separate categories: i) employment substituting benefit (ESB) ( foglalkoztatást helyettesítő támogatás ), received by those capable of working and of active age, when not working  1 https://www.ksh.hu/stadat_files/szo/en/szo0021.html   