Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  There is no real multidimensional needs assessment, only a formal assessment when deciding the type of bene fit for which people of active age are eligible. The official department of the district office examines the health and financial situation when benefits are established, and assesses eligibility for the ESB or for a benefit for people suffering from healt h problems or taking care of a child. For the latter, the extent of the client's health impairment is also examined, with the decision resting with the complex assessment of the rehabilitation committee. This latter group of beneficiaries does not have to cooperate with the PES, but can register as service claimants and continue to benefit from employment support and services from the PES if they meet the jobseeker criteria.  There is no framework for a social integration agreement and no social services routinely target MI recipients. Benefit recipients have free access to healthcare, reduced local travel, all universal provisions (e.g. family allowance, or based on their income, if they meet the criteria), local benefits, regular child protection benefit o r public health card, but there are no formal mechanisms that promote access by MI recipients. The exception is public works, where MI recipients are a designated target group.  Limited data are available on take -up, showing only that 43.6% of the 255  701 registered jobseekers in August 202117 were without any benefits. No studies in the last ten years have accounted for the reasons behind non -take -up (Albert, 2015). There is very little integrated provision of services, although this may happen informally in some locations or as part of EU -funded programmes18. In Budapest, for example, employment services are provided by NGOs, which are capable of providing very complex services for disadvantaged clients with a wide scope of needs. This is not systematic or formalised, as there are neither sequ ential services nor a monitoring framework.  4 