Impact of MI schemes  Current eligibility conditions do not ensure that the MI scheme covers all of the relevant population at risk. There are no studies on coverage or take -up of MI benefits, despite the fact that approximately half of registered jobseekers do not receive any provisions and the working poor are not included in MIS. In recent years, the numbers of ESB recipients decreased significantly, from over 200  000 at the beginni ng of the 2010s to 79  327 (monthly average) in 202019. The number of ESB beneficiaries decreased more than the number of registered jobseekers, representing 22.9% of jobseekers in 2020. There are very significant regional variations: in more disadvantaged counties in Northern Hungary and Southern Transdanubia, this proportion was over 30%, in Budapest it was only 11%, while in Győr -Moson -Sopron county, it was as low as 3.7%. Even bigger differences can be found when comparing smaller territorial units. In r egions with unfavourable employment opportunities, the proportion (and the actual number) of ESB recipients is higher20, suggesting that a significant segment of the population in these deprived regions is dependent on last -resort type schemes.  There is no  official poverty line in Hungary - the AROP index is used only for comparison and is not related to benefit levels. The KSH no longer calculates subsistence minimums. Most social provisions are tied to the arbitrary level of the statutory minimum for old -age pensions, which has remained the same amount since 2008. The adequacy of the MIS has not been researched and the benefit amount is not indexed. The amount of the ESB has not changed since 2012 and is fixed at 80% of the monthly statutory minimum for ol d-age pensions, irrespective of family members  19 https://www.ksh.hu/stadat_files/szo/en/szo0021.html   20 PES data provided by the Ministry of the Interior on 18 Octob er 2021.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  18  or composition. It is therefore doubtful that it can fulfil basic social protection or poverty reduction needs. Social provisions payable to families with children somewhat compensate for this. Although availa ble data would permit a number of analyses, there is no scientific evidence on the relative numbers of people taken out of poverty or other indicators of the social integration of MI recipients.  Labour market activation is not supported by social services,  despite being justified by the disadvantaged situation of most of the beneficiaries. Some minor recent steps have been made in this direction, however. This approach should be strengthened, as the government still intends to carry out social integration v ia labour market participation. Without a monitoring framework to measure the efficacy and effectiveness of the MIS, there is no basis for evidence -based policy -making.  Those aged under 18 years are not eligible for MI schemes. However, after the governmen t decreased mandatory schooling from 18 to 16 years in 2013, the number of very young (16 -17 years old) registered jobseekers increased dramatically, most of whom were subsequently employed as public work s scheme workers, suggesting that they likely regist ered with this specific aim in mind (Molnár, 2019a). Most have no vocational skills or have not finished primary school, and have little chance of finding employment on the primary labour market. The government modified the regulations for public works so that those under 25 can only be employed as public work s scheme  workers if they cannot find any other job with the help of the Youth Guarantee Scheme. A major obstacle is the low level of inclination to register as a jobseeker. Some do not register as they  do not have sufficient employment history to obtain the jobseekers benefit21 (Bördős and Koltai, 2020). Research based on interviews has found that the most disadvantaged young people are overrepresented among those less than 25 years old registered as jobseekers (Bördős and Koltai, 2020). Another study analysing data from the EU Labour Force Survey found that among young people not in education, employment or training (NEET), the registration rate is highest for those who have the highest chance of finding employment, i.e. those most in need of PES support were those least likely to register (Molnár, 2019b).  There is a need for a legally defined minimum income level, based on research and taking into consideration the level of other related benefits. The level of minimum income should then be calculated as the difference between th e available resources of the household and that baseline level. The current level of minimum income should be significantly raised and indexed annually. Conditionality and sanctions likely exclude thousands of needy people from the current MIS22, but there  is no research as yet to support this statement. The impact of the MI scheme on reducing levels of poverty can be seen as limited and decreasing. This is not surprising, as net replacement rates have been also decreasing, being among the lowest in the OEC D for the long -term unemployed: for single earners, the rate was only 21% in 202023.    21 A number of online articles and websites try to highlight the advantages of registration even where a person is not eligible for the ESB: https://www.te ol.hu/tolna/kozelet -tolna/palyakezdokent -is-erdemes -regisztralni -705561/  22 Similar views were shared in 2014 by experts from the Hungarian Minimum Income Network (EMIN, 2014).  23 https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=NRR#  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in t he effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  19  6 