Links with labour market activation  Because of the categorical nature of minimum income provision in Ireland, only some of the schemes have a relationship to inclusive labour market goals and provisions. In other words, not only are the programmes targeted on particular groups , but also  there is a sharp divide between those deemed eligible for work and those not. This means that since the relevant service for activation - Intreo  - generally foc uses on activating those on the live register (where the unemployed are registered), there is an exclusion of people on other working age welfare payments such as the Supplementary Welfare Allowance. These recipients may voluntarily wish to access the labo ur market and other support available through these services but there is no targeting or enabling them to do so and indeed no capacity that is reserved for them. It would be a positive development were such services opened up to these recipients of minimu m income schemes, but it should also be noted that SWA is generally seen as an interim benefit for immediate assistance while recipients await decisions of applications for other claims (e.g. Jobseeker’s Allowance). As the activation services in  15 There was also a ‘Mortgage Interest Supplement’ scheme, which, since 1 January 2014, has been closed to  new entrants (without affecting people who were getting Mortgage Interest Supplement before this date).  16 For both JA and SWA a person must be in payment for the same period to qualify (65 weeks). JA is calculated on a 6 -day payment week and SWA on a 7 -day basis. With effect from September 2022 there will be a reduction of the qualifying period for Jobseeker’s and  Supplementary Welfare Allowance recipients from 15 to 12  months.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  Ireland ar e more or less exclusively targeted at  recipients of the Jobseeker’s Allowance, it is this scheme, which  is most relevant for the discussion here.  The activation plan for JA recipients centres around job search  and education and training services. Here at the centre of this ecosystem is Intreo  (Ireland's PES agency as explained above), which co -operates with several other actors such as SOLAS (State’s designated Further Education and Training agency), Local Enter prise Services and voluntary service providers. For various schemes offered there are also  interdepartmental working groups involving the Department of Social Protection, the Department for Further and Higher Education and the Higher Education Authority (HEA). The main services offered to MI recipients are directed self -help and job search guidance, one -to-one employment service engagements and referral to employment and training supports.  To describe the activation regime for JA recipients, it starts with an immediate profiling when a claim is made. Based on the information provided by the recipient (e.g. age, gender, marital status, children, perceived health, spousal earnings, employment/unemployment history, willingness to relocate, location, transport a nd education history) (O’Connell et al. 2009), a 'Probability of Exit' (PEX) score is calculated to determine whether the person has a low, medium or high probability of exiting Live Register/activation service and take up employment – or in other words exiting benefit receipt. The frequency and timing of engagement through the Intreo service is based on this PEX score, whereby people with a lower PEX score receive relevant services sooner and more frequently. In general, the process works as follows: clien ts who are deemed eligible for Jobseeker’s Allowance and Benefit are: called for a Group Information Session within 2 weeks; then scheduled for a one -to-one interview with an officer after the information session to develop a Personal Progression Plan. Act ivation review meetings are then held on a one -to-one basis to review the Personal Progression Plan and give further guidance support as required. There is a contract in place, which  commits both the service recipient and provider to a number of responsibi lities and is closely related to the Personal Progression Plan which charts steps into employment and which is also binding. The Plan is updated over time and is monitored. Normally, recipients must go to Intreo  monthly  to 'sign on' to declare that they ar e still unemployed and are looking for work; but this requirement was suspended until January 2022 due to the Covid -19 public health measures.  If jobseekers fail to comply with the Personal Progression Plan they may be subject to sanctions (in relation to benefit reduction or suspension). A recipient may:  1) be refused a JA payment if they do not meet all the conditions that apply to the payment;  2) be disqualified from a payment for a period of time in certain circumstances;  3) have their payment reduced  (and subsequently stopped altogether for a period of time) if they do not attend meetings or participate in appropriate employment schemes, training or work experience.  The penalty rates for JA in 2020 were the following (these do not apply to people ove r 62): a reduction in weekly payment from  €203 to €1 59, or from €157.80 to €124.80, or from €112.70 to €87.70, depending on the existing amount of benefit payable. If a recipient faces a penalty and continue not to meet the conditions, then they can be disqualified from the JA payment for up to 9 weeks (one cannot be disqualified before at least 21 days on penalty).  There might be changes to the benefit during the transition to work or participation in training/education programmes. If the recipient takes u p employment 3 days a week or less, their JA is tapered in line with their earnings (the recipient must still meet the relevant income requirements). An earnings disregard of €20 per day for a maximum of 3 days per week is allowed for each member of a coup le; the remainder of the Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  earnings are assessed at 60% to give the weekly means amount (OECD 2020). The weekly means amount is then deducted from the maximum Jobseeker’s Allowance applicable to the person’s situation to calculate the appropriate Jobseeker’s  Allowance payment. There is no allowance in the case of 4 or more days of employment as this is one of the main eligibility criteria. In the case of participation in training/education programmes, the relevant allowance is paid and the JA allowance is sus pended for this duration. If the recipient receives a Qualified Adult Dependant payment, this is not suspended, but neither do the dependants receive any extra training/education allowance (but they may be eligible for other allowances such as a travel all owance).  Related to the effectiveness of activation measures for JA beneficiaries, there was a recent evaluation of Intreo  reforms (Elish et al. 2019), to analyse whether Intreo , the current PES introduced in 2012, is more effective than its predecessor, k nown as National Employment Actions Plans (NEAP) PES system. The result of this evaluation is not directly relevant as it does not compare groups of JA recipients who did or did not receive activation services, but still, there are some lessons to note. Th e evaluation, which was conducted only one year after the activation process reforms were introduced, established some short -run impacts. The results show that the introduction of Intreo  had only some marginal impacts on exits from the Live Register, but i t led to the early identification of invalid unemployment claims, providing evidence of clear efficiency gains of having services delivered under a single point of contact.  3 