Summary  Ireland’s minimum income provision is complex: There is a range of different programmes for different population categories such as the unemployed, lone parents, those who are ill or disabled. Two main schemes ddd are 1) Supplementary Welfare Allowance (SWA ) – the key minimum income scheme of last resort, and 2) Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) – the main non -contributory allowance for people of working age.  Eligibility is primarily based on a test of means, habitual residence in the State  (where applicable)1, and being registered for work.  Given that these programmes are all based on a means -test, the re is a  possibility of non -take up , yet there is little information on non -take up of minimum benefits and it is not possible to provide a figure . In terms of proble ms associated with the coverage of relevant vulnerable populations, asylum seekers are among the groups that are particularly affected by the 'Habitual Residence Condition' (HRC)2. Homeless people, even if they satisfy this condition, might still be among the groups to have difficulties in access to benefits due to issues such as proving where they reside.  The level of benefits seems somewhat adequate against the 40% poverty thresho ld (corresponds to e.g. 109% of the threshold for a single adult 97.4% for single adult with one child) but falls short of a minimum standard if one looks at the other threshold set at 60% (72.6% of the threshold for a single adult and 73% for single adult  with one child).  The activation services in Ireland are , generally speaking, targeted to recipients of the JA and are provided by the country’s Public Employment Service (PES), Intreo . The frequency and timing of engagement through Intreo  is based on a ‘P robability of Exit’ (PEX) into employment score, whereby people with a lower PEX score receive services sooner and more frequently.  When it comes to the links to social services and integrated provision, in Ireland the idea of access to ‘quality services’ as a cohering and integrated idea is under - developed generally. Being on a minimum income scheme per se carries no preferential access to social services. Although this bears no necessary relationship to being a minimum income recipient, tests of means ar e used as a criterion for access to health services on a free of charge basis through the medical card  and GP visit card ,. But there are link s to other benefits and anyone who can demonstrate need can apply for a range of means -tested and discretionary ass istance, such as Rent Supplement, Fuel Allowance, Back to School Clothing and Footwear Allowance, Exceptional Needs Payment etc.  In relation to the governance of the minimum income schemes in Ireland, decision making and organisation of social benefits are  at national level under the auspices of the Department of Social Protection. For JA, the benefits are administered at the local level by the Intreo centres and local branch offices and service delivery takes place here. SWA is administered by the Communit y Welfare Service of the Department of Social Protection, located at various service centres.  There are no regular evaluations (beyond customer service monitoring) carried out on impact and effectiveness that is shared publicly – this is done on an ad -hoc basis from  1 There is no requirement to satisfy the habitual residency condition for emergency needs payments (to assist people with once -off expenditure they could not be reasonably expected to meet out of their weekly income) or urgent needs payments (payment for an urgent need to people who would not normally be entitled to Social Welfare Allowance.  2 The HRC is largely based on five criteria taken from a decision of the European Court of Justice Case C 90/97 Swaddling v UK  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  time to time for selected programmes/schemes. The most recent impact assessment is promising in that some of the secondary benefits that the recipients of SWA and JA might be entitled to reduce deprivation.  From the evidence considered here, it can be suggested that the minimum income benefit level for the households with the greatest risks be prioritised  further  for uprating – namely, households with (especially older) children and working -age households headed by one adult  (there is some moveme nt in that respect – recent budgets have increased rates for child dependents and in particular older children ). A second recommendation would be for a systematic process to assess the adequacy of these and other benefits and services on a regular basis an d that the decisions around whether and when to uprate the benefit levels should be made on the basis of the evidence from this process overall.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibil ity criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the  access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, educa tion level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 Description of national schemes providing  minimum income support3  Minimum income provision in Ireland is complex, consisting of a range of different programmes for different population categories. Hence, as well as a general scheme of last resort, particular sectors of the population of working  age for which targeted minimum income programmes exist include: the unemployed, lone parents, those who are ill or disabled, and carers. In practice then, minimum income provision in Ireland serves a diverse set of needs and also quite a diverse populatio n. The trend has been towards rationalisation but from a minimum income perspective categorical provision is still the norm. Within this complex and fragmented system of minimum income provision in Ireland, in this report two main schemes will be analysed:  the Supplementary Welfare Allowance (SWA) as the key minimum income scheme of last resort and the Jobseeker’s Allowance (JA) as the main non -contributory allowance for people of working age4.  In Table 1 the total expenditure for the programmes is presen ted.  Table 1.   Expenditure (gross) for SWA and JA, 2018 -2020  MI scheme  2018  2019  2020   3 Where there have not been any changes, scheme descrip tions and assessments rely on: Daly, M. (2015). ESPN Thematic Report on minimum income schemes – Ireland. Directorate -General for Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/social/BlobServlet?docId=15160&langId=en   4 Other schemes include One -parent Family Payment, Disability Allowance etc.  