Governance mechanisms  Decision -making and organ isation of social benefits are at national level under the auspices of the Department of Social Protection. Under that, decisions regarding a person's entitlements are made by a Deciding Officer.  It is open to a person at any time to request a review of an y statutory decision made by  the Department and any new evidence or information provided to the Department will be considered as part of this review.    The Social Welfare Appeals Office functions independently of the Minister for Social Protection and of t he Department and is responsible for determining appeals against decisions in relation to social welfare entitlements, insurability of employment and certain decisions made under the Supplementary Welfare Allowance scheme. If a person is dissatisfied with any decision made by a Deciding Officer or Designated Person (SWA) with regard to their entitlement, they may appeal that decision to an Appeals Officer.  Decisions in relation to exceptional needs and urgent needs payments are not appealable to the Social Welfare Appeals Office but can be appealed directly to a designated review officer within the Department.  Jobseeker's Allowance  is administered by staff at the department's network of Intreo  Centres/Branch Offices throughout the country. At the local level, the benefits are administered by the Intreo centres and local branch offices and service delivery takes place here. This is a one -stop shop for both JA income support scheme and activation /employment services. The service offered by Intreo  encompasses external contracted service providers delivering services in some 150 locations. It also encompasses a network of co -operation with the State’s Further Education and Training Services and Loca l Enterprise Services and with voluntary service providers. Supplementary Welfare Allowance  is administered by the Community Welfare Service of the Department of Social Protection, located at various Intreo  Service Centres (currently there are 26 offices a dministering SWA). Designated Persons are appointed to decide a person’s entitlement to SWA and the amount of any such allowance.  The Department of Social Protection is responsible for the monitoring. In terms of customer service monitoring, the Department  currently has  in place a "Customer Service Strategy 2020 -2022". The strategy develops and implements, under the guidance of the Customer Service and Staff Support Programme Board, key actions to deliver enhanced customer service to the Department’s custom ers, including benefit claimants and recipients, via the four main channels i.e. telephone, face to face, digital and post. Each of these four strands of service has their own detailed individual action  17 Number of people at the intersection of service and benefit receipt is not av ailable .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  points and metrics18. For JA, microdata is collected by the Department and is supplied on a weekly basis to the national statistical office (the CSO) to keep the Live Register updated.  The Department provides data annually to a think -tank to carry out impact assessments of proposed budgetary measures/reforms , but it is understood that these are only made available for internal use. As part of the annual budgetary cycle, the Department also undertakes its own ex -ante and ex -post social impact assessments of the main welfare and direct tax budgetary policies, w hich includes the estimated impact on the at risk of poverty rate. Published outputs of this analysis include the annual Tax Strategy Group Social Protection paper19 and the annual Budget Social Impact Assessment20. There has been a culture of conducting e valuations on an ad-hoc basis from time to time for selected programmes/schemes21. This lack of regular evaluations (beyond customer service monitoring) carried out on impact and effectiveness that is shared publicly is one of the weaknesses in the governance of social benefits. Another weakness relates to the appeals  system in place. Although it is reported that this  has improved significantly in the recent years , as noted above under section 1, due to ineffective governance structures,  the time to process an appeal is still lengthy (IHREC 2017) .  5 