Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  Bein g on a minimum income scheme  per se  carries no preferential access to social services in Ireland. Although this bears no necessary relationship to being a minimum income recipient, t ests of means are used as a criterion for access to health services on a f ree of charge basis through the medical card and GP Visit Card. Entitlement to health services in Ireland is primarily based on residency and means. Any person, who is accepted by the HSE as being ordinarily resident in Ireland is entitled to either full or limited eligibility for health services. Medical cards are awarded to persons who, in the opinion of the Health Service Executive,  are considered to have full eligibility status as they are unable to provide health services for themselves and their depen dants without undue hardship. In certain circumstances, the HSE may exercise discretion and grant a medical card, even though an applicant exceeds his or her income threshold, where he or she faces difficult financial circumstances, such as extra costs ari sing from an illness or undue hardship exists . Medical Card provision is primarily based on financial assessment. In accordance with the Health Act 1970 (as amended), eligibility for a medical card is determined by the HSE.  The HSE assesses each applicatio n on a qualifying financial threshold, which can be found in the Medical Card and GP Visit Card National Assessment Guidelines . This is the amou nt of money that an individual can earn a week and still qualify for a card. It is specific to the individual’s own financial circumstances. The HSE conducts a financial assessment based on an applicant’s household income after tax, PRSI and the Universal Social Charge (USC) have been deducted.  Certain expenses are also taken into account.  If a person's sole income is derived from a social welfare payment, even where this is more than the current means threshold, he/she will be awarded a medical card . In addition to medical card holders, all children under the age of 6 and persons aged over 70 are entitled to a GP visit card which provides for GP services without charge for the card holder. Limited eligibility persons may also qualify for free GP care where  they have been means assessed by the HSE that it would be unduly burdensome to arrange to provide general practitioner medical and surgical services for themselves and their dependants.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  The same is true for education services and housing17. The idea of access to ‘quality services’ as a cohering and integrated idea is under - developed generally; provision of services does not fall within the general understanding of social protection in Ireland, which tends to be strongly income support (Daly 2020). One e xception is activation -based services, discussed above, which have recently been on the rise). There is little or no integrated planning across the ‘social services’ (education, health, housing, social protection); there is no assessment of the need for so cial support of MI recipients. Hence, there is little to report on this topic. Of course, there are, on the face of it anyway, reasons why there should be a stronger link between being on a minimum income scheme and access to services. There is evidence of  service inadequacy – with deterioration over the period of austerity policies. This seems to be attributable mainly to supply and administration issues rather than necessarily a problem in access for the ‘needy population’ (Social Justice Ireland 2015), y et the matter of the ‘passporting’ between minimum income support and quality social services should be given consideration in Ireland, for issues of social justice and also because it might spearhead reform.  4 