Impact of MI schemes  The RdC was introduced as recently as April 2019, less than one year before the outbreak of the COVID -19 pandemic. The subsequent crisis saw delays in the effective implementation of ALMPs and social inclusion activities for RdC recipi ents, as well as a lack of detailed studies on the social impact of the RdC (e.g. poverty, household wellbeing, health, crime) to date.  However, it should be noted  that  Parliament introduced measures in December 2021 to tighten the rules for eligibility for benefit and to institute prior checks o f self-declared data , as well as broaden ing the types of crime excluding ex -prisoners from entitlement . Despite clear limitations in the conditionality activities emphasised by many experts (e.g. Caritas Diocesiana , 2021; Scientific Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income, 2021), the RdC represents a clear step forward in the Italian strategy for  17 The role of national, regional and local authorities in delivering  social assistance benefits and services is regulated by Law No 328/2000 . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  tackling poverty and social exclusion. It has undoubtedly contributed to alleviating poverty levels, particularly the increases in poverty as a result of the pandemic.   The effect of the RdC  on the incidence  of relative poverty is likely to be relatively limited , since it raises household income up to a  level below the current at-risk -of-poverty threshold18. Nevertheless, t he measure   has a major  impact on reducing the intensity of relative poverty and in reducing both the incidence and intensity of  absolute poverty.  Using a static microsimulation model, Gallo and Raitano (2019) found that the introduction of the RdC contributed to a 6.6 p.p. reduction in t he intensity of poverty (from 38.5% to 31.9%, as measured by the income gap ratio indicator, that expresses, as a share of the threshold, the gap between mean income of the poor and the poverty line). When relative poverty is assessed against the 40% of th e national median threshold, the RdC reduced the incidence of poverty by 2.0 pp (from 9.2% to 7.2%). The RdC also slightly reduced the Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income (from 0.327 to 0.315).  Similar figures were estimated by INPS (2020), w hich reported a 0.7 p.p. reduction in poverty incidence (based  on 50% of national median disposable income threshold), a 5.8 p.p. reduction in poverty intensity (as computed by the income gap indicator), a non -negligible decrease in the S80/S20 indicator ( from 6.4 to 5.9)19, and a slight reduction in the Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income (from 0.339 to 0.332). These reductions in inequality and poverty achieved by the RdC are largely attributable to the levels of benefit it provides, especia lly for smaller households.  Despite these important reductions in Italy’s high levels of monetary poverty and income inequality, experts have highlighted a number of flaws in the RdC, which have yet to be taken into account by policymakers  In order to expa nd the number of beneficiaries without increasing budget costs, the government introduced an equivalence scale to assess equivalised income and compute the level of the RdC, an approach that places large families at a disadvantage and provides relatively f ewer resources to poor children (Saraceno, 2019). Single -member households also gain more from the additional benefit received by RdC recipients to top -up rents or mortgage, as those amounts are independent of household size.  Other experts have noted that the RdC risks creating ‘poverty and unemployment traps’, as it is close to the (often very low) wages of many workers, especially in southern regions, and provides no incentives to combine low -paid work earnings with MI benefits (Lucifora, 2019; Scientific  Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income , 2021 ). Conditionality rules and sanctions focus mainly  on work, with a strong emphasis on ‘negative’ incentives (despite the low level of labour demand even pre -pandemic), with less attention paid to soc ial services, education and training. The implications of obliging RdC beneficiaries to accept low -paid jobs (i.e. monthly salary above EUR 850) in workplaces very far from their place of residence should be carefully considered. However, some of the limit ations are attributable to the fact that the measure  is as yet not fully implemented , especially the part o n active inclusion, which requires the strengthening of services.  Serious concerns remain in respect of the eligibility conditions for migrants, as t he 10 -year residence requirement may prevent many poor migrants from claiming the RdC. This was confirmed by the low proportion of non -EU citizens among RdC recipients compared to the share of migrants in poverty. According to 2020 data provided by the INP S and ISTAT, non -EU households accounted for only 9.1% of RdC recipients but for 25.3% of those in absolute poverty.   18Households with sources of income excluded from the RdC means test (mostly the companion allowance – indennità di accom pagnamento  paid to household members  with disabilities ) are exceptions . 19 Relative amount of equivalised disposable income received by households in the top and bottom quintiles.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  A further issue is the coexistence of too many binding eligibility requirements in relation to household financial and housing wealth that might exclude poor households whose wealth just exceeds the threshold. In addition, Law Decree No 4/2019  establishes that the whole monthly amount of the RdC must be spent (few exceptions are temporarily allowed), limiting beneficiaries’ choices in how the y plan their spending.  Data limitations hinder studies of the target efficiency of the RdC (i.e. its capacity to cover all poor households without being wasted on households above the poverty line). In practice, both relative and absolute poverty are offi cially estimated using household expenditure on consumption, but no micro -dataset jointly measures income, wealth and consumption, preventing researchers from easily estimating the overlap between household poverty (measured by ISTAT) and eligibility for t he RdC. Nevertheless, some ministries and institutions have begun to merge administrative and survey datasets that may prove useful in assessing the effectiveness of the RdC.  The measure itself is crucial to the Italian social protection system, with exper ts proposing policy changes to overcome the limitation identified (e.g. Alleanza contro la povertà in Italia , 2021 ; Scientific Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income, 2021). The main proposed changes relate to: i) choice of an equivalence scale  that is less penalising for large households (e.g. the ISEE scale, or a scale that also assigns 0.4 to minors and has a lower ceiling); ii) introduction of a sliding -scale monetary benefit reflecting the size of households in rented accommodation; iii) relaxation of residence requirements to include non -Italian citizens; iv) reduction in the effective marginal tax rates on additional earnings for beneficiaries, which currently deter participation in short -term and low -paid jobs, and might induce some recip ients to work in the informal sector.   The main current limitation of the measure, however, does not concern the regulatory design but the implementation process. As noted above, the measure has not yet been fully implemented, especially as regards  the link to social and labour market integration . The full implementation of this basic element requires the strengthening of the employment centres  and social services. Once the link h as been established , receipt of the cash benefit  and involvement in activation measures should occur simultaneously.   6 