Summary  Italy introduced its first minimum income (MI) scheme, ‘Inclusion Income’ , in 2018. Characterised by low benefits , that scheme was replaced on 1 April 2019 by the ‘Citizenship Income’ ( Reddito di Cittadinanza , RdC), a means -tested cash benefit target ing poor households, and conditio nal on participation in job  search or social inclusion activities.  In order t o be eligible for the RdC, households must satisfy a set of income/wealth requirements and must have resided in Italy for 10 years , the last two  years continuously . On 30 September 2021, 1  336  944 households were receiving the RdC, having risen significantly since the outbreak of COVID -19.  The benefit for a single -member household tops -up annual income to EUR 6 000 . The benefit increases with hou sehold size , according to an equivalence scale that assigns  limited increases in the income threshold when the number of household members – particularly minors – rises. Independently of household size, RdC recipients receive  an additional EUR  280 towards their rented accommodation, w ith home owners receiving EUR 150 to wards their mortgage. Therefore, the maximum monthly  benefit for a single -member household is set at EUR 780 . This value is  higher than the equivalised relative poverty rate based on househol d expenditure, is in line with  the absolute poverty lines  for single -member households, and is slightly lower than the 60% of the median at-risk -of-poverty ( AROP ) threshold.  While the  amount  received by eligible households  cannot be considered low in relat ion to poverty lines , the design of the RdC experiences problems in coverage and adequacy. First ly, the scale used to equivalise income places l arge households at a disadvantage in terms of eligibility and benefit amount. Second ly, the 10 -year residence re quirement prevents many EU and non -EU-citizens from applying for the benefit. Third ly, the housing and financial wealth requirements may exclude some income -poor households that have assets whose value is just over the allowable threshold.  Although there are no official estimates, the take -up rate  of the scheme appears well below 100%. Nevertheless, all available estimates suggest t hat the contribution of the RdC to alleviating poverty is not negligible.  Entitlement to RdC is strongly linke d to beneficiaries ’ involvement  in active labour market or social inclusion activities, depending on the previous work history of household members. Only people with disabilities, older people, those in formal education or training, caregivers for seriousl y disabled individuals or children under 3, and low -paid workers working at least 20 hours a week  are excluded from the se obligation s. In January 2021, of the households subjected to activation requirements, 49.1% were covered by active labour management p olicies ( ALMPs ), 41.3% were in social inclusion activities , and 9.6% had at least one member in ALMPs and another in social inclusion activities.  Critics  point out that the design of the RdC does not incentivise recipients to begin work, particularly low -wage work, as the effective marginal tax rate on additional income is very high (a EUR 1 increase in earnings brings about a 80/100% reduction in RdC).  Furthermore, there is a strong concern that the Citizenship Income might benefit irregular workers, or ev en incentivi se this form of work.  Households where no member s are  directed to sign the 'Work Pact' instead take a social inclusion path (managed by the municipality ), following a multidimensional assessment to identify household needs and appropriate servi ces.   The implementation of ALMPs and social inclusion services for MI  scheme recipients is still experiencing delays resulting from the COVID -19 pandemic, which began shortly after the introduction of the RdC.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market meas ures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and  assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support n eeds to be targeted.   1 