Links with labour market activation  For all adult household members  under 65, application  for benefit means agreeing to be immediate ly available for work ( disponibilità immediata al lavoro,  DID)  if it is to be successful ,. Only people with disabilities, those in formal education or traini ng, caregivers for people or children under 3 with serious disabilities , and  low-paid workers are excluded from the DID obligation.  After the application , the administrative information is used to assign people to either the PES, where they sign a ‘Work P act’, or social services, where they sign a ‘Social Inclusion Pact’ with their municipality. The PES calls for all household members to sign a 'Work Pact' (apart from those exempted from the DID declaration) where a member satisfies at least one of the fol lowing conditions: i) an unemployment status for no more than two years; ii) recipient of unemployment benefit or receiving unemployment benefit within the past year; iii) having signed a 'Service Pact' with the PES within the last two years, that is still  valid. All adult members aged less than 29 and not exempt from the DID must sign a 'Work Pact', even if other household members are assigned to the 'Social Inclusion Pact'.  According to January 2021 data of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, of the  recipient households, 5.1% were not subject to activation requirements (typically households with older members in receipt of the PdC). Of the households subject to activation requirements, 49.1% participated in a 'Work Pact', 41.3% participated in a ‘Soc ial Inclusion Pact’, and 9.6% households had at least one member who signed a 'Work Pact' and another who signed a 'Social Inclusion Pact'. These shares remained fairly constant since the introduction of the RdC in April 2019.  Individuals assigned to the P ES first receive a quantitative profile (i.e. an index of their likelihood of still being unemployed in a 12 -month period), then undergo a face -to-face interview about their motivational and soft skills. After establishing their quantitative and qualitativ e profile, the PES defines an individual action plan. The PES should meet individuals addressed to them within 30 days of approval of the MI application. However, the implementation of ALMPs for MI recipients is still subject to delay, as the COVID -19 pand emic began shortly after the introduction of the RdC. Pre -COVID, that 30 -day period was often missed because of PES staff shortages, or implementation delays in ALMPs, especially for MI scheme beneficiaries).  The National Agency for Active Labour Market Policies (ANPAL) reported that, at the end of September 2021, 1  109  287 individuals (59.1% of beneficiaries aged 18 -65, 37.3% of total beneficiaries of any age) were assigned to the PES. Of those, however,  13 These benefits are established at national level  and consist of both  in-kind benefits (the ‘water bonus ’) and  in reduced tariffs (the ‘waste tax ’ rebate, the ‘electricity bonus ’, the ‘gas bonus ’). See Raitano et al. (2020) for details of access to es sential services for low -income people in Italy.  14 When computing the total household amount of the RdC , minor children will be not considered , i.e a couple with a minor child will receive an RdC amount corresponding to that of a couple only . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  only 37.9% (approximately 420  000 individua ls) subsequently signed a 'Work Pact' and were taken in charge by PES. Approximately 92  000 actually started an active labour market measure, which typically comprised vocational guidance. Approximately 4 000 individuals started a training activity, and ap proximately half of those used the 'replacement allowance' ( assegno di ricollocazione ), a voucher for specific services from private employment agencies or training from accredited centres. Such training institutions also receive a monetary premium (a reba te in social contributions) when they contribute to the re -employment of a MI recipient.  Monetary incentives are offered to employers hiring MI recipients to foster employability. These consist of social contribution relief equal to the amount of the RdC n ot received by those who started work, but very few firms took up these incentives. If an RdC recipient starts a self -employment activity during the first 12 months of MI payment, they receive an additional lump -sum benefit equal to six months’ of their Rd C.  Critics note that the design of the RdC does not incentivise recipients to start work, particularly low -paid work (e.g. Alleanza contro la Povertà in Italia , 2021; Scientific Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income , 2021). In fact, l abour in come is wholly taken into account when computing the equivalised income for means -testing and benefit computation (the benefit tops equivalised annual income up to EUR 6 000). However, when an RdC recipient starts working as an employee, 20% of their addit ional earnings are not considered in the means test until the ISEE declaration is renewed (i.e. the subsequent year). Thus, the actual marginal tax rate of increased employment earnings is temporarily 80% (and becomes 100% when the ISEE declaration is rene wed). In the case of additional incomes from self -employment contracts, these are not considered in the means test for a two -month period, after which individuals' incomes are updated quarterly.  According to recent data in a Parliamentary Audit by ANPAL, s ince the introduction of the RdC (i.e. April 2019 to September 2021), 540  000 beneficiaries started a job when receiving the benefit. That represents approximately one -third of the individuals who signed a 'Work Pact'. However, the jobs are often short -term, with approximately equal numbers of recipients finding work independently and through the PES. No policy evaluations have been carried out on the effect of activation policies, partly due to the difficulties in causal evaluation of ALMPs in the context of COVID -19. In addition, conditionality rules were suspended from March to July 2020.  Finally, a tight set of sanctions is applied to recipients who do not take part in  ALMPs  or social inclusion activities. The RdC  is revoked when  one of the members of th e household : i) does not sign a  'Work Pact' or a  'Social Inclusion Pact'; ii) does not participate, without a justified reason, in  training and active labour market activities; iii) does not take part in the municipally organised PUC for 8 -16 hours a week;  iv) does not accept at least one out of two  suitable (based on wage and distance) job offers in the first 18 months15; and v) does not report changes in the ir employment situation  or in household income and wealth.  Very serious sanctions are established for untruthful reporting in RdC applications. False certificates and declarations are punish able by imprisonment from two to six years, while failure to communicate income/wealth changes , including from irregular jobs, incurs a penalty of imprisonment for o ne to three years.  The S cientific Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income (2021)  pointed out that t hese sanctions risk penali sing communication errors committed in good faith  and se em excessive compared to sanctions for other types of crimes .  15 Those who have to accept a job far from their place of residence receive no financial aid for relocating. The Budget Law for 2022 has introduced tighter criteria, with a job in the whole Italian territory required to be accepted from the second offer.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  3 Access to services and integrated provision of targeted social services  Households where at least one member is not directed to sign a 'Work Pact' undergo a multidimensional assessment to identify household needs and de fine appropriate services before entering a social inclusion path (managed by the municipality). The multidimensional needs assessment targets individuals who are neither exempt from activation activities nor assigned to the PES after the application is ap proved (see Section 2). However, some individuals may still be directed to social services, thus signing a 'Social Inclusion Pact', after their interview with the PES.  According to the most recent data provided by the Ministry of Labour and Social Inclusio n 48.3% of household beneficiaries of the MI were assigned to a 'Social Inclusion Pact'. Substantial regional differences are evident in the share of households assigned to social services (e.g. 60.1% in Lazio, compared to 32.4% in Marche).  Households shou ld be called for a multidimensional needs assessment by social services within 30 days of approval of the application for MI, and should sign the 'Social Inclusion Pact' within 20 days of that assessment. However, the implementation of social inclusion ser vices is still subject to delay in Italy, partly due to the effects of COVID -19. The 30 -day time limit is often ignored, with substantial delays in the multidimensional assessment. According to the most recent data, approximately two -thirds of household be neficiaries of the RdC assigned to social services were taken in charge by an individual social worker ( Scientific Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income , 2021) . After the initial multidimensional assessment, households are divided into four pa ths: i) they sign a 'simplified Social Inclusion Pact' when no complex household needs emerge and the main issue is the lack of a job; ii) they sign a 'Social Inclusion Pact' when complex household needs emerge, iii) they are directed to specialised sector s when needs relate mostly to health and care; and iv) they are redirected to the PES when only job needs emerge and the individuals are considered employable. The scope of 'Social Inclusion Pacts' is to establish specific household commitments and identif y the most appropriate services to deal with the main determinants of household poverty. The RdC income may be revoked if households do not respect the specific commitments defined in the 'Social Inclusion Pact' (e.g. training) or refuse to participate in the PUC (see below).  Social services are provided by municipalities and are identified according to the household needs reported in the multidimensional assessment. The law introducing the RdC established that the recipients (both those participating in AL MPs and those directed towards social services) are obliged to participate in the PUC when those projects are launched in their municipality. Active recipients must participate in the PUC for 8 -16 hours per week. The projects aim to foster participants’ sk ills and social integration, and focus on specific areas (cultural, environmental, social, artistic, training and protection of common areas, etc.). They cannot replace existing jobs.   No data are available on the various social inclusion services provide d to RdC recipients  through the PUC . According to data updated in September 2021, 39% of Italian municipalities (approximately 7  900  in total ) ha d started a PUC. The total number of activated PUCs was 11 745 , involving up to 95 000 individuals. In practice , however, only 32  000 individuals have been involved in the PUCs activated16. Among the individuals involved in a PUC, 55% ha d signed a 'Social Inclusion Pact' and 45% a 'Work Pact'.    16 The delay in starting PUCs stems from the COVID -19 pandemic and to municipal difficulties in managing these types of project ( Caritas Diocesiana , 2021).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10   4  