Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  Prior to the 2010s , Italy was one of very few E uropean Union (EU) Member States without a minimum income (MI) scheme1, i.e. a means -tested benefit for all households satisfying monetary eligibility requirements and conditional on  activation activities (an anti -poverty means tested scheme, named ‘social benefit’ (assegno sociale ) was only paid to those aged 65+ )2. Following several pilot schemes from 2012, I taly introduced its first MI  scheme , ‘Inclusion Income’ ( Reddito di Inclusione , REI) in 2018 (Law No 33/2017)  (Raitano et al., 2018; Jessoula, 2016) . It was characterised by very tight monetary requirements (e.g. equivalised annual income should not  exceed  EUR 3 000), low benefits (e.g. EUR 187.5 0 per month for a single -member household) and short duration ( the benefit lasted 18 months at most, w ith a further 12 months payable after a six-month break ).  Within one year, the REI was replaced by the so -called  ‘Citizenship Income’ ( Reddito di Cittadinanza , RdC; Law Decree No 4/2019)  on 1 April 2019 . The ‘Citizenship Income’ becomes the ‘Citizenship Pension’ ( Pensione di Cittadinanza , PdC; Law Decree No 4/2019) if all household members are aged 67 + years , or those under 67 in the household are disabled).  Unlike RdC beneficiaries, recipients of the PdC do not have to fulfil labour and social inclusion obligations3. For the purposes of this report, MI schemes refers to both the RdC and PdC, unless otherwise specified.  The RdC is a means -tested cash benefit targeted a t poor and socially excluded households, living in Italy for  many years, and is conditional on partici pation in job -search or social inclusion activities (Jessoula et al., 2019). The RdC may be paid to all households that meet the eligibility conditions , irrespective of their characteristics (e.g. employment conditions, type of income source, eligibility for other welfare benefits). It represents a last -resort income , even if the right residence requirement preclude its consideration as a universal safety net (see Section 1.1) . The RdC has three times the budgetary resources of its predecessor, the REI, as well as more generous rules about monetary eligibility requirements and amounts. It also lasts for longer. However, in addition to limits in the current implementation of active  1 See Natili (2019) for a comparison of the paths followed by MI schemes in Europe.  2 Unlike the PdC (whose eligibility requirements are based on both household income and wealth (see Section 1.1), eligibility for the assegno sociale only depends on the income of the individual/married couple.  3 Poor older people may have access to differ ent means -tested benefits, such as the ‘social allowance’ or the minimum pension integration ( integrazione al minimo pensionistico ), whose monetary eligibility conditions differ from those of the PdC.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  labour market policies (ALMPs) and social inclusion activities for beneficiari es, there are concerns that the eligibility requirements may impair the capacity to mitigate poverty among large households and non -Italian citizens residing in Italy.  In order to assess the effectiveness of the measure, the law provides for the implementa tion of an evaluation plan approved by a specially established “Scientific committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income”.   1.1  Eligibility  In order t o be eligible for the RdC, households must satisfy a set of income and wealth requirements4. More s peci fically , households must have:   A maximum annual Indicatore Situazione Economica Equivalente  (ISEE,  the indicator of equivalised economic conditions, taking into account both income and wealth , where wealth is valorised at 20% of its amount) of EUR 9 3605;   An annual equivalised income no higher than EUR 6 000 ( EUR 7 560 for the PdC) , where the equivalised income is computed using an equivalence scale different to that used by t he ISEE (see Section 1.3) . No  income is exempt in the computation of the income threshold;   Housing wealth (excluding primary residence) no higher than EUR 30 000;   Financial wealth no higher than EUR 6 000, increased by EUR 2 000 for each additional household member , up to a maximum of EUR 10 000. The financial wealth threshold is increased by EUR 1 000 for each child from the third child onwards; the threshold is also increased by EUR 5 000 for each disabled household member ( EUR 7 500 for those with a serious disability).  Eligibility condition s also apply to the endowment of durable goods . More specifically, the household should not own6: i) cars first registered in the six months prior to submitting their application ; ii) cars with a cylinder capacity exceeding 1  600cc, first registered in th e two  years prior to claim submission; iii) motorcycles with a capacity exceeding  250cc, fi rst registered in the two  years prior to their application ; iv) ships and recreational craft.  Eligibility criteria also include 10 years’ residence in Italy, the la st two of which must be continuous. By contrast, there are no conditions in respect of the age of household members, i.e. there is no lower age limit7.  If they are to avoid  losing their entitlement to the MI, beneficiaries considered fit to work must  i) sign a ‘Work Pact ’ with the Public Employment Services (PES); and ii) accept at least one of two  ‘suitable ’ job offers in the first 18 months8 (see Sections 2 and 3).  Those who are unfit to work must sign a ‘Social Inclusion Pact ’ with the municipal social services. Beneficiaries in both ALMPs and social inclusion activities are obliged to take part in ‘v aluable projects for the community’ (Progetti Utili per la  4 No automatic adjustments of means -testing thresholds and benefit amounts.  5 ISEE rules consider some exemptions of income and wealth in their calculations (Law Decree No 159/2013).  6 Cars and motorcycles for disabled people  that are  purchased with tax relief are not considered . 7 Ex-prisoners convicted of some types of crimes cannot apply for the benefit for 10 years after thei r final sentence.  The Scientific Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income (2021)  has noted that the exclusion of ex -prisoners clashes with the need to reintegrate these individuals in society.  8 Suitability is assessed in terms of  wage (monthly wage above EUR 850  (i.e. 10% higher than the maximum RdC amount for a single person)  and distance (first job offer: workplace no more than 80km from place of residence; second offer: whole Italian territory  (80 km from place of residence  in case of temporary or part time job) ; in case of benefit renewal, the first job offer has to be accepted whatever the distance ). Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  Collettività , PUC ) for 8 -16 hours a week, if the ir municipality starts a project . No conditionality rules apply to beneficiaries of the PdC . The RdC is paid for a maximum of 18 months, at which time it may be renewed by submitting a new application (the payment is suspended for a month). No such suspension is applied to the PdC.  Following the outbreak of COVID -19 in 2020, t wo changes were temporarily introduced to the RdC. Firstly, the conditionality rules on beneficiaries’ job search activities were suspended from March to July 2020 . Secondly, the government introduced a top -up suppl ement for RdC recipients in the categories of workers protected through the extraordinary allowances for self -employed /atypical /seasonal workers  and where the RdC amount was lower than the amount of th ose allowances. An additional MI scheme , ‘Emergency Inc ome’ ( Reddito di Emergenza , REM) was introduced in 2020 and renewed in 2021 . For several months , the REM was paid  according to different eligibility conditions than those of the REI  in order to protect poor households that were not covered by the emergency  measures introduced during the pandemic, nor entitled to unemployment benefits, short -time work allowances, or RdC (Natili and Raitano, 2020; Gallo and Raitano, 2020; National Institute of Social Security (INPS), 2020; 2021) . Applicants may apply for the benefit through the post office, in a ' patr onato ’ (an office set up by a trade union or association to give free help and advice on social security and other matters), in a fiscal assistance centre, or by completing an online application form. The appl ication itself is quite simple, however it requires applicants to be in possession of a valid ISEE declaration  to indicate their  financial circumstances , which is used ro determine their right of access to a variety of subsidised services.  The ISEE declara tion certifying income and wealth is particularly difficult and time -consuming, and applicants often need help from expert offices (e.g. patronati  and centres of fiscal assistance). Applications are submitted to INPS within 10 working days, and INPS verifi es the information in the application by comparing it to administrative records. This is done before benefit s are given . (Originally, self -declared residency and citizenship requirements could be verified after payment began to be paid, but because of a high incidence of fraud, checks have been brought forward .) Payments begin the month after the request is approved by INPS.   1.2  Coverage  According to the official figures collected by INPS statistical observatories, on 30 September 2021, 1 336  944 households (corresponding to 2  969  016 individuals) receiv ed the RdC. The number of households receiving at least one monthly instalment from January to September 2021 was 1  684  416 , compared to 1  107  445 pre -COVID -19 ( April -December 2019 ). The annual publ ic spending for minimum income ( MI) benefits increased accordingly, and was expected to reach EUR 8.8 billion (approximately, 0.5% of GDP) at the end of 20219. However, three distinct issues emerge in respect of coverage of the poor population (Gallo and Raitano, 2019 and 2020; Alleanza contro la povertà in Italia , 2021; Caritas Diocesiana , 2021; Scientific Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income, 2021 ). Firstly, the unusual scale used to equivalise income places large households  (especially households with children)  at a disadvantage, as it assumes high economies of scale from sharing resources (see Section 1.3) and risks excluding large households with low income from the benefit. In this regard, many scholars and also the Scientific  9 A further EUR 0.5 billion is spent on manag ing ALMPs and social inclusion activities for RdC recipients.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  Committee ha ve proposed a revision of the equivalence scale10.(This scale might well have been chosen to reduce the impact of spending on the RdC on the public budget, while making good the 5 -Star Movement’s 2018 electoral promise of a maximum EUR  780 monthly benefit for a single person .) Secondly, the 10 -year residence requirement prevents many non -EU-citizens from applying for the benefit. Thirdly, although the ISEE alrea dy considers wealth in the means test, the additional housing and wealth requirements may exclude some income -poor households with assets just above the value threshold . (It should be noted in  this regard  that the Scientific Committee has proposed to weake n the wealth test but to include the value of the assets when calculating the benefit payable .) Simulations carried out by Gallo and Raitano (2020) show that only 3 4% of households with an annual ISEE below EUR 9  360 also satisfy all the other eligibility requirements. The main requirements not satisfied are those relating to equivalised income and financial wealth.  In the case of the equivalised income requirement , this reflects the fact that the equivalence scale used is less generous than the scale  used by ISEE .  A large  share of households at the bottom of the equivalised disposable income distribution are not eligible for the RdC. Gallo and Raitano (2019) found that onl y 38% of households in the poorest income decile were eligible for the RdC, this falling to 13% among the households in the second decile. They also found that the RdC potentially covered 25.3% of households at -risk -of-poverty (AROP) and 39.1% of those wit h an equivalised disposable below 40% of the national median . Revising equivalence scales and eligibility requirements in respect of wealth, as  suggested by the Scientific Committee, should  increase th ese percentages. However, it should be noted that the  imperfect overlap between income poverty and receipt of RdC also depends on the endowment of wealth of households in the bottom deciles of the income distribution .  In addition to the lack of potential coverage, the take -up rate of the scheme (i.e. the share of recipients of those  eligible) appears to be w ell below 100%, although no official estimates exist. Caritas Diocesiana  (2021) and Gallo and Raitano (2020) estimate d a take -up rate close to 80%, which represents an increase  since the outbreak of COVID -19. The rate was higher in southern regions and among households eligible for  a higher benefit11. No studies have examined the reason s underpinning incomplete take -up, nor is it an issue discussed in the context of RdC reform. Possible reasons for incomplete take -up include lack of information, unwillingness to fulfil the time -consuming application to receive small benefits, and the degree to which informal workers are unwilling to be subject to  potential controls and activation  measures.  (To simplify access to this and other subsidised services and to facilitate take -up, a pre -filled method for completing the ISEE has been introduced ) 1.3  Adequacy  In relation to the poverty thresholds, the RdC monetary eligibility conditions are muc h more generous than those applied for the REI (Jessoula et al., 2019) and are in line with standard poverty thresholds. The income threshold for a single -member household amounts to EUR  6 000, or 83% of the relative poverty threshold computed by the Itali an National Institute of Statistics (ISTAT) based on household expenditure, and 87% of the AROP line based on 40% of national equivalised disposable income median.   10 The introduction from 2022 of a universal benefit to support households with minors ( assegno unico universale familiare , AUUF) might however reduce the ir relative disadvantage since the amount of AUUF is higher for households with a low ISEE.  11 Estimated t ake -up rate compares the number of eligible persons simulated in the EU -SILC with the number of recipients reported in the official data.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  The benefit for a single -member household tops -up annual income to EUR 6 000 ( EUR 7 560 for  the PdC ). It is not linked to inflation . These thresholds increase with household size , according to the equivalence scale described below. In addition, beneficiaries of the RdC  receive an additional EUR 280 to wards their monthly accommodation rent, while  homeowners receive EUR 150 towards their mortgage payments (the amount of these extra benefits is independent of household size and cannot exceed the monthly amount of the rent/mortgage). For beneficiaries of the PdC,  the maximum monthly rent contribution  is set at EUR 150.   The maximum annual benefit for a single -member household is set at EUR 9 360 ( EUR 780 per month), which is far  higher than the equivalised relative poverty rate ( EUR 601 per month) and the 40% of the disposable income median ( EUR 572 per month),  and is in line with the 60% of the median AROP threshold ( EUR 858 per month) and with the absolute poverty lines referring to the areas where the cost of living is higher12. The minimum and maximum monthly values of the absolute poverty lin e for single -member households aged 18 -59 (according to the geographical macro -area of residence and the type of municipality) are EUR 840 and EUR  570, respectively.  However, problems emerge because of the equivalence scale used to adjust the benefit amoun t and the income test threshold for household size. In implicitly assuming extremely high economies of scale from living together (Raitano , 2021), the income threshold – and thus the benefit amount – is based on an equivalence scale that attributes 0.4 to each additional adult and only 0.2 to each minor under 18. The equivalence coefficient cannot exceed 2.1, i rrespective o f household size (2.2 if there is a disabled household member). A couple (equivalence size: 1+0.4=1.4) with three  children under 18 (3*0 .2=0.6) can receive up to EUR  12 000 (2* EUR 6 000) per year, while the maximum annual amount for a household composed of two  (or more) adults and at least four  children under 18 is EUR 12 600 (2.1* EUR 6 000). This scale thus places  households with many mem bers and minors (who are usually more at risk of poverty in Italy) at a disadvantage: as t heir total income is divided by a smaller denominator, they may face more difficulties in satisfy ing the EUR 6 000 income test and, when th at limit is satisfied, they  may receive a lower benefit.  Looking at the adequacy of the RdC for larger households, the maximum monthly amount for a couple aged 18 -59 with two minor children aged 11 -17 is EUR 1  180 while, for the same household type, minimum and maximum monthly value s of the absolute poverty line are equal to EUR 1  778 and EUR 1  312, respectively. The gap between the absolute poverty line and the amount of the RdC increases substantially with household size . However, an assessment of the overall impact of low-income support on different types of household  needs also to consider the effect of  the newly introduced allowance for dependent children ( AUUF ). Whereas  RdC includes a maximum amount of EUR 100  for each child ( EUR 500 weighted by an equivalence fact or of 0.2 applied to children ), AUUF of EUR  175 a month is paid for each child to households with ISEE below EUR 15 000.  Despite the issues with the equivalence scale and the constraints stemming from residence requirements (recommended for reform by the S cientific Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income in 2021), the contribution of the RdC to alleviating poverty is not negligible (see Section 5).   1.4   Links with other benefits  The  RdC may be provided to recipients of other cash and in -kind welfar e benefits if the household fulfils the means -tested conditions (e.g. the RdC may top -up the amount of  12 Absolute pove rty lines are computed by ISTAT using the reference budget approach and differ by household composition and by the cost of living of the area where the household resides (Cutillo et al., 2020). An online tool computing the absolute poverty line according t o household composition and geographical location is available at: https://www.istat.it/it/dati -analisi -e-prodotti/contenuti -interattivi/soglia -di-pover ta  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  unemployment benefits if total household resources are below the income and wealth thresholds). From 2021 , beneficiaries of the RdC are automatically ent itled to water, sanitation, gas and energy bonuses, which allow them to pay  lower  tariffs for these types of essential service s (Raitano et al. , 2020)13. From 2022, recipient households will receive the new ‘unique and universal child allowance’ ( assegno u nico universal e familiar e, AUUF), which will replace all existing tax exemptions and allowances for households with children. The RdC may be partially combined with the AUUF. More specifically, households receiving the RdC will receive EUR 175 per child (increased to EUR 260 f or the  third and subsequent children ) monthly , but the RdC will be reduced by the smaller  amount of the RdC increase related to the presence of minor children in the household  (due to t he equivalence scale,  see Section 1 )14.   2 