Governance mechanisms  The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy is responsible for the regulation and implementation of the RdC and PdC . Applications and benefit payments are managed by the INPS, while ANPAL  monitors ALMPs .  The monetary benefit is delivered by the INPS at natio nal level. ALMPs  and social inclusion services are delivered at regional and municipal level, respectively. The PES are organised at regional level and are responsible for implementing  'Work Pacts', while municipalities are responsible for implementing  'Social Inclusion Pacts'17. The INPS, the Revenue Agency, the National Labour Inspectorate and the municipalities are responsible for inspecting and verifying declarations and certificates provided by applicants and beneficiaries. Where a false declaration is  discovered, they send the documentation, in its entirety, to the judicial authority within 10 days.  The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy is responsible for monitoring the implementation of the RdC and publishing an annual report. The decree introduci ng the RdC (Law Decree No 4, 28 January 2019) states that annual monitoring and assessment should be carried out by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy.  The Ministry of Labour and S ocial Policy published its first report on the implementation of the R dC at the end of 2020.  A detailed monitoring and assessment exercise was carried out in 2021 by the Scientific Committee of experts appointed by the Minister of Labour and Social Policy, with the report subsequently published on 9 November 2021 (Scientific  Committee for the Assessment of Citizenship Income , 2021) . No formal procedures exist to ensure that experts' recommendations are taken into account  in the parliamentary debate.  The INPS publishes a set of detailed tables and figures on its website each month. Periodic monitoring of beneficiaries who have signed the 'Work Pact' is carried out by ANPAL, which issues a monthly note on the number and characteristics of those assigned to a 'Work Pact'. A centralised monitoring framework for beneficiaries admi tted to a 'Social Inclusion Pact' , prepared by the Ministry of Labour  and Social Policies , is being published to provide timely updates on the state of implementation.  Currently the data are provided to local authorities for programming of activities . No detailed information is available about the people directly involved in the management of the RdC. However, approximately EUR 0.5 billion w as assigned to the PES and the municipalities to manage ALMPs and social inclusion activities for RdC recipients.  5 