Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  There is only one social assistance benefit alloc ated based on an assessment of a person’s income and that corresponds to the common characteristics of minimum income schemes in Latvia - the guaranteed minimum income (GMI) benefit ( pabalsts garantētā minimālā ienākuma līmeņa nodrošināšanai ). It is a non -contributory minimum income scheme, where the entitlement and the amount of benefit are not related to social contributions. The fundamental aim of the GMI benefit is to ensure a minimum level of income for each member of a household in need whose income i s lower than the GMI threshold set by the government.  Until 2021, the Cabinet of Ministers set the minimum level of income at national level (GMI threshold), while municipalities set the minimum level of income for specific categories (e.g., people with d isabilities, retired people) at a level not lower than that set by the government. From 2013 until 2017, the GMI threshold was set at EUR 49.80 per month, increasing to EUR  53 per month in 2018, and EUR 64 per month in 2019 ( Regulations of the Cabinet of M inisters No. 913, No. 5050) . In 2019, the inadequate social safety net became a major concern of the Latvian Ombudsman1. On 25 June 2020, t he Latvian Constitutional Court ruled that the GMI was unconstitutional because the low amounts failed to ensure tha t any person could live in a state of human dignity. After consultation with the Union of Local Governments, the Parliament approved a new GMI amount of EUR 109 per month for 2021, executing the decision of the Constitutional Court ( Latvian Constitutional Court, 2020 ). S ince 2021, the unified GMI threshold has been set at EUR 109 per month for the first person in a household and EUR 76 per month for each subsequent person in that household.  To date, the GMI benefit has been administered and financed by the municipalities. It is planned that from 2023, the GMI benefit and housing benefit will be co -financed by the State2. Only people designated as ‘needy’ (with a monthly income threshold of EUR 272 for the first person and EUR 190 for each subsequent person in the household) are eligible for the GMI benefit. The municipal social service office first assesses whether a person or family should be recognised as being in need, with the assessment of eligibility criteria for the GMI benefit evaluated only after th at decision.  The GMI benefit is calculated as the difference between the GMI level set by the Cabinet of Ministers and the claimant’s average monthly income over the previous three months. The GMI level is determined per person, but the amount of  1 The Latvian Ombudsman filed five suits with the Constitutional Court, including the level of GMI and the income threshold to be recognised as a needy person (Rajevska, 2020).  2 Information collected through consultation with a representative of the Ministry of Welfare on 15 November 2021.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  benefit  is calculated  for the household (see Section 1.3). The decision of the municipal social service office to grant the GMI benefit may be challenged at the local government council, and a household may launch an appeal against that decision before the courts,  in accordance with the procedures specified in the Administrative Procedure Law. No data are available on such appeals.  1.1  Eligibility  Eligibility for GMI benefit is assessed by considering the income level of a household (or an individual living alone). Al ong with income level, a person must hold the status of a person in need, be registered as unemployed (for non -employed working -age people, with some exceptions3) and have a registered residence in the administrative territory (municipality) in order to c laim GMI benefit. There are no restrictions in respect of citizenship status4, age, labour market status, or other factors. The Law on Social Services and Social Assistance defines the groups who are not entitled to social assistance benefits (including t he GMI benefit) as those who are in a place of imprisonment or an institution of long -term social care and social rehabilitation, or an educational institution for social correction. The eligibility criteria for the GMI benefit are set to be reviewed in 2022, primarily for the types of income considered in the means test5.  Claimants must submit a declaration of subsistence means and – if the necessary information is not available in the data register of the local government and the State – income statements, in order to allow the municipal social service office to assess their income and material resources.  One of the household members applies to the municipal social service, presents an identity document, and submits: 1) an application; 2) a statement from the employer of each employee in the household on remuneration for the full last three calendar months; 3) a statement on income from economic activity for the last full three calendar months for each performer of economic activity in the household; 4) statements of bank accounts for all persons in the household for the full last three calendar months; 5) documents certifying any income of an irregular nature and payments received for the 12 calendar months prior to submission of the applic ation; and 6) any other documents necessary to make a decision.  Cabinet Regulations of 17 December 2020 No. 809 on the assessment of the material situation of the household and receipt of social assistance determines the types of income to be considered i n the means test : income from paid employment, income from casual work, State social insurance benefits and allowances (including unemployment benefit), pensions , quick loan, and  income from capital and assets.   3 A person of working age who wishes to receive GMI benefit and who is not working has an obligation to register with the SEA, except where they are a person with disabilities, the recipient of an -age pension, a woman on antenatal or maternity leave, a parent on childcare leave or another person in a household who is caring for a child of pre -school age, if it is not possible to ensure otherwise due to objective reasons, is one of a disabled child's  par ents if the child does not receive appropriate care services, is a person aged 15+ in full -time education in a basic education, general secondary or vocational secondary education institution, or a full -time student in a higher education institution (Law o n Social Services and Social Assistance).  4 The right to social assistance, including the GMI benefit, is guaranteed to citizens and non -citizens of Latvia, third -country nationals and their family members with a permanent residence permit. The GMI benefit  can also be granted to citizens of the EU, European Economic Area states and the Swiss Confederation and their family members who have obtained the right of permanent residence or are entitled to reside in Latvia and who have stayed in Latvia for at least  three months, or who have stayed in Latvia for at least six months if entering into employment relationships in Latvia has been the purpose of their stay, and their attempt to find a job is attested by registration in the SEA. The right to GMI benefit is also granted to people with alternative status and their family members (Law on Social Services and Social Assistance).  5 Information collected through consultation with a representative of the Ministry of Welfare on 15 November 2021.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  The Law on Social Services and Social Assista nce of 31 October 2002  determines the types of income not considered in the means test . These include: State family benefit; supplement to the State family benefit; childbirth allowance; disabled child care allowance; supplement to the State family benefit  for children with disabilities; benefit to a person with disabilities requiring special care; funeral benefit; transport allowance for persons with disabilities or with reduced mobility; support for children suffering from coeliac disease; benefit for the  services of an assistant; social guarantees for an orphan or a child left without parental care after termination of extra -familial care; one -off financial support for a refugee or a person who has acquired alternative status; alimony for children; moneta ry funds obtained from charity; financial benefit obtained as a result of social campaigns (e.g. social and charity actions); student loans; social assistance benefits previously disbursed by the local government; scholarships for persons studying at an ed ucational institution (up to the amount of the minimum monthly salary); financial support for the unemployed for participation in active employment measures that do not provide for the conclusion of an employment contract (except scholarship for participat ion in paid temporary public works); remuneration for the donation of blood or blood components; loan and interest payments for the purchase of a single home; and personal income tax refund following annual income declaration.  During the state of emergency  periods, documents could be submitted remotely and the municipal social service could grant GMI benefit on the basis of a previous application. Due to the COVID – 19 pandemic a national level scheme for benefit in crises  was introduced . It was  a social su pport in  a situation when a person (family) could not  ensure their basic needs due to a circumstance caused by COVID -19. The amount of the benefit was  determined by the local government, the state co -finance d 50% of the amount (the state co -financing max. €40 per month6 and EUR 75per month7) for an adult and 100% of the amount ( €50) for each child in the family  (Law on Social Services and Social Assistance) . 1.2  Coverage  Data on needy persons and GMI beneficiaries are collected uniformly by all municipalities . The statistics on needy persons are available in the same breakdowns as data on GMI beneficiaries (i.e. social demographic groups, expenditure on social assistance, working/not working status, number of needy persons whose income is below/above the GMI l evel).  In 2019, 17  249 people (all members of households with a needy status) received the GMI benefit, including 3  165 children (18%), 6  478 unemployed (38%), 1  690 other people of working age (10%), 3  097 people with disabilities (18%), and 2  819 people  of retirement age (16%). In 2019, EUR 4  721  053 was spent on GMI benefit. The average amount of GMI benefit per person was EUR 42.79 per month, and the average duration for receiving the GMI benefit was 5.08 months.  In 2020, the GMI level was increased fr om EUR 53 to EUR 64 per month, but the number of GMI beneficiaries decreased by 4.27%, possibly due to wage and pension increases exceeding the increase in the GMI threshold. In 2020, 16  511 people received the GMI benefit, including 3  057 children (19%), 6 393 unemployed (39%), 1 629 others of working age (10%), 2  766 people with disabilities (17%), and 2  666 people of retirement age (16%). In 2020, EUR 5  187  828 was spent on GMI benefit. The average amount of GMI benefit per person was EUR 48.91 per month , and the average duration for receiving GMI benefit was 5.68 months.  Data cannot be provided for different income groups, as data in Welfare Information System are not grouped by income quintile. This is because information on all incomes  6 In force from 12 Ma rch 2020 to 31 July 2020 and from 9 November 2020 to 24 February 2021.  7 In force from 25 February 2021 to 30 June 2021 and from 1 July 2021 to 31 December 2021.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  of individuals is not directly available in the Welfare Information System subsystems and also because the categorisation of income quintile is determined at household rather than individual level.  Raising the minimum income thresholds in 2021 was expected to have an im pact on more than 140  000 low -income and very low -income people, including 24  829 GMI benefit recipients. As the income threshold for a needy household was increased to EUR 272 per month (compared to EUR 128 per month in 2020) for the first or only person in the household and EUR 190 for each subsequent person in the household, it was estimated that the number of people classified as needy would increase by 72% between 2020 and 2021 (from 37  464 in 2020 to 64  439 in 2021), and would then be followed by a sl ight decrease in numbers in 2022 and 2023 (Plan for Improving the Minimum Income Support System 2022 -2024), in line with the general downward trend in the absolute number of  people in need since 2012 ( SIA Jaunrades laboratorija , 2017; BISS, 2019, 2020, 2021). The number of GMI recipients could follow a similar pattern: it was estimated to increase by 50% (from 16  511 in 2020 to 24 829 in 2021) due to the increased GMI threshold, then decrease slightly to 23  591 in 2022, and incr ease to 27  310 in 2023, with a planned GMI threshold of EUR 122 per month (Plan for Improving the Minimum Income Support System 2022 -2024).  Take -up or non -take -up of the GMI benefit has not been studied and there is no information on the numbers of eligible people who do not apply for the benefit. However, some general assumptions are possible, based on the available administrative data on people in need. The potentially eligible population for the GMI benefit can be measured in relation to household s/persons with income equal to or below a person in need’s income threshold (EUR 128/month in 2020). In 2020, in total there were 37  464 persons in need (2% of total population) of which 12  300 (33%) had a monthly income below the GMI threshold and were el igible for the GMI benefit. Yet, in 2020, the total number of GMI beneficiaries was 16  511. According to the monthly data, the share of the GMI beneficiaries varied from 35% of all people in need (9 248 persons) in January 2020 to 38% (10  127 persons) in D ecember 2020 (Ministry of Welfare, 2020). These biases can be explained by data compiling and processing methodological issues, as each person receives the GMI benefit for about five or six months on average, but the total number of beneficiaries is disclo sed in annual terms. In general, these data suggest that the GMI benefit non -take -up level is rather low, especially taking account of the national at -risk -of-poverty (AROP) threshold and AROP rate (see Section 1.3). The government has not implemented any measures to reduce non -take -up. 1.3  Adequacy  The GMI benefit is calculated as the difference between the amount set by the Cabinet of Ministers and the person/household income. The benefit is calculated according to the formula:  P = (GMI1 + GMI2 x n) – I Where  P - GMI benefit; GMI1 - GMI level for the first person in household (EUR 109, as set by the Cabinet of Ministers); GMI2 - GMI level for each subsequent person in household (EUR 76); n – number of household members; I - net income.  For households without a ny income, the benefit is equal to the GMI threshold. For households with some income, the benefit supplements their income up to the level of the GMI threshold. For instance, a family with two children aged between 1.5 and 18 , with neither partner employe d nor receiving unemployment benefit, would receive EUR 337 per month, while a single person aged 35 who is unemployed with no dependents would receive EUR 109 per month. The GMI benefit is paid once a month.  The GMI benefit is granted for a period of thr ee months, as long as the person or household is considered to be in need, and is renewable. (Re)assessment of eligibility is made by the municipal social service office every three months, with the benefit Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  granted for as long as the entitlement conditions  are fulfilled. The amount paid can change over time, depending on changes in the social or material situation of a beneficiary. The GMI benefit is not suspended until the end of the benefit period if the household's financial situation has improved and ho usehold income has increased on the basis of income from employment, review of pensions and benefits, or from economic activity.  The Law on Social Security of 7 September 1995 stipulates that the GMI level must be reviewed at least every three years.  In t he wording of the Law i t is not bound to any socially economic indicator (there is no automatic indexation nor adjustment for inflation). In practice, as the GMI benefit was paid by local governments until 2021, the GMI level was reviewed based on local go vernment budget options and was negotiated every year between the government and the Union of Local Governments. Since 17 September 2021, the Plan for Improving the Minimum Income Support System 2022 -2024 has defined a common national methodology for the G MI level: in year N it is set at 20% of the median income of year N -3. The median income figures are projections calculated by Central Statistical Bureau (CSB) of Latvia. The legislation sets the absolute threshold of the GMI level rather than the methodol ogy for its calculation , though the GMI threshold is set upon methodology according to initial assessment of the legal act . As a result, in 2021, the amount of the unified GMI level is set at 20% of the median income for 2018 (i.e. EUR 109 per month), in 2 022 the GMI remain s at the 2021 level, in 2023 , according to the most recent data,  it will be EUR 12 5 (20% of the median for 2020), and in 2024 it will be EUR 127 (20% of the median for 2021).  As the m edian income are projections from the CSB of Latvia, th e amounts might change accordingly, especially due to external economic and political factors recently caused by the war in Ukraine.  The European Council has repeatedly recommended that Latvia should i mprove the adequacy of its minimum income benefits (Eur opean Commission, 2018). The increase in the GMI benefit was also mentioned as a key recommendation for Latvia in the most recent Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD) review (OECD, 2019). On 25 June 2020, t he Latvian Constitutional  Court ruled that the GMI was unconstitutional, as the low amounts failed to ensure that any person could live in a state of human dignity. The anti -poverty organisation EAPN -Latvia8 has regularly highlighted the shortcomings in the determination and appl ication of the GMI threshold.  EAPN -Latvia proposed increasing the level of GMI by EUR 330 per month, thereby raising it above the national AROP threshold in the corresponding year (EAPN -Latvia, 2018). It noted that the minimum amount of consumption resources needed to meet human needs can best be described by the subsistence minimum consumption budget, which is expressed as the amount of material goods and services necessary for life that ensures the restoration of human working capacity (EAPN -Latvia, 2020a; 2020b). In October 2021, a s tudy on the relative expenditure budget of households (the alternative indicator for subsistence minimum consumption budget) was completed (SIA Projektu un kvalitātes vadība , SIA SKDS, 2021). The amounts for different types of households living in differen t places can vary by more than EUR 150 per month. For example, the relative expenditure for a person of working age in Riga is EUR 423.27 per month, while for a retired household in rural areas it is EUR 362.41 per month, for a family with one child aged 1 5-17 living in a city other than Riga, it is EUR 797. 64 per month (Ministry of Welfare, 2021b). In all cases, the relative expenditure budget thresholds are higher than the GMI threshold (EUR 109 per month).   8 EAPN -Latvia monitors poverty processes and makes recommendations for poverty reduction.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  In 2020 , the national AROP threshold9 was EUR 472 for a single person and EUR 991 for a couple with two minor children. Overall, in 2020 , the AROP rate10 for the population was 23.4 % (  439 000 persons)  (CSB, 2022). F or single household it was 53.4 %, for a single person with children it was 37.4 %, for a couple it was 2 3.1%, for a couple with one child it was 12. 6%, for a couple with two children it was 11.7%, and for a couple with three or more children it was 16.5 % (CSB, n.d. ). In 2020 , the gross minimum wage was EUR 430 and, accordingly, the income of  a minimum wage earner (single household) was EUR 306. In 2020 , income per household member in the poorest households (1st  quintile group) comprised EUR 214 monthly, but in the richest households (5th  quintile group) it was EUR 1  407 monthly. Households wi th an average income fluctuated between EUR 367  monthly (2nd  quintile group) and EUR 720  monthly (4th  quintile group) (CSB, n.d. ). All of these indicators are several times higher than the GMI threshold, suggesting that the GMI scheme threshold remains inadequate, despite recent improvements. However, the GMI benefit is not the only income source for a proportion of GMI beneficiaries, as there are types of income that are not considered in the means test.  1.4  Links with other benefits  There are two basic social benefits administered and paid by local governments GMI benefit  and  housing benefit, and two supplementary benefits - crisis benefit and benefit to cover certain expenses , for instance,  healthcare  benefit . None of these three other benefits  is directly linked with GMI benefit, but with the person’s income level or the status of person in need or low -income person. The two basic benefits are defined as mandatory if a person meets the eligibility criteria. In addition, municipalities have the rig ht to set other benefits, thus improving the social situation of the local population.  This section describes the benefits typically received by the most part of  GMI beneficiaries,  although there are many other forms of support for needy persons , including  GMI beneficiaries,  set by the state  (see Section 3 for all benefits).   The housing benefit  is one of the two basic social assistance benefits paid from the municipal budget (alongside the GMI benefit). The provision of assistance to address housing issues is established as an autonomous function of local government (Law on Local Government). Ho using benefit is non -contributory. Until 30 June 2021, there was no uniform calculation methodology for housing benefit, but such a uniform calculation entered into force on 1 July 2021. There are two preconditions for receiving housing benefit: 1) an asse ssment must be made of the material situation (income level) of the household, and 2) all invoices and other evidence of housing expenses must be presented to the municipal social services. The incomes of all household members are considered in assessing t he income level of the household. As of 1 July 2021, the amount of housing benefit is calculated using a formula that takes account of the GMI threshold for the household, actual expenditure on housing  (the total amount of eligible monthly expenditure is c apped) , and the total income of the household. The share of housing expenditure covered is not identifiable, nor is there a cap on the housing benefit. In calculating the amount of housing benefit paid, the municipality may exercise favourable discretion i n respect of the items of expenditure in the binding regulations, and may determine the coefficient for the GMI thresholds for the household and the types of households to which the coefficient is applied.  According to municipal administrative data, in 202 0, 68% of the municipal population received healthcare benefit out of all benefits issued to cover various expenses  (Ministry of Welfare, 2020) . The municipal healthcare benefit  must be claimed separately. The amount of the benefit varies between municipal ities, as does the name of the benefit. All needy persons, including GMI beneficiaries, are exempt from  9 60% of disposable income median, recalculated per equivalent consumer . 10 Share of persons with an equivalised disposable income below 60% of the national median equivalised disposable income.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  payments (patients’ fees and co -payments). Expenditure by those recognised as being in need of treatment, on medication, or with eligible medical device s is reimbursed in full for outpatient treatment (except special reimbursement, e.g. reimbursement of pharmaceuticals, which has a maximum of EUR 14  228.72 per person per year).  Crisis benefit  is an additional social assistance benefit paid by the municipa l social service without assessing the material situation of the household (income and property). The purpose of the crisis benefit is to provide material support to prevent or mitigate the consequences of external events. No data are available to estimate  if GMI recipients also receive this additional benefit.   Subsidised energy (reduced electricity costs)  is available to needy persons (monthly income threshold of EUR 272 for the first person in the household and EUR 190 for each subsequent person) and low -income persons (monthly income threshold of EUR 436 for the first person in the household and EUR 305 for each subsequent person), including beneficiaries of the GMI benefit. Almost all energy costs are covered within the housing benefit, and needy and low -income households automatically receive an in -kind compensation for electricity consumed. A needy househo ld/person receives a supply of electricity as a protected user if that status was conferred in the previous calendar month.  From 1 September 2021, the amount of the support for a household/person in need was  set at EUR 5 per month and at EUR 10 per month f or large families . Dur to the energy crisis f rom 1 November 2021 to 31 December 2022 the support was increased by EUR 10: EUR 15 per month for needy and low -income households and EUR 20 for large families  (Cabinet Regulations No. 345 of 1 June 2021). The s hare of energy costs covered cannot be identified from the data available.   2 