Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  The Law on Social Assistance and Social Services obliges municipal social services to assess clien ts' needs, material and personal resources (motivation, necessary knowledge and skills, education, profession, etc.) and social support system, as well as to determine their participation obligations and agree measures. The Law stipulates that the needs as sessment must pay special attention to families with children. All GMI beneficiaries undergo this assessment. Each municipality must have at least one social worker per 1  000 inhabitants in order to ensure professional assessment of the needs of the popula tion and the provision of quality social services and social assistance.  11 Information collected through consultation with a representative of the Ministry of Welfare on 15 November 2021.  12 Information collected through consultation with research project manager from the BISS, currently working on an evaluation study on GMI beneficiaries, on 27 October 2021.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  According to a 2017 survey of social service employees, each social worker has 30 clients per month, on average (BISS, 2017).  The Law on Social Assistance and Social Services sets ou t a common framework for needs assessment at national level, with municipalities free to decide on the use of specific instruments and methods of assessment (e.g. interview, questionnaire). The methods typically depend on the capacity of the social service s office and its social workers. For social assistance, including eligibility for the GMI benefit, assessments are usually based on document analysis and informal conversation. In each case, a client file is set up, which includes information about the ass essment13. Every recipient of social assistance, including GMI beneficiaries, must cooperate with the social services office, both in the assessment and to improve their social and material situation, by:   Providing information on themselves;   Participatin g in the social rehabilitation measures for retaining, renewal, and acquisition of work and social skills;   Making active efforts to increase their earning ability and income;   Receiving social rehabilitation services if they or any of their family members  have addiction problems (alcohol, drugs, gambling);   Using the social assistance received for the intended purpose.  Municipal social services have the right to change or rescind a decision on payment (in full or in part) of basic social assistance benefi ts, including the GMI benefit, if a working -age person refuses to engage in these cooperation activities without a valid reason, except where they are caring for a child and are thus unable to undertake other activities to improve their situation.   Social  services are not targeted, other than through the individual assessment of a person’s situation. The social worker informs the person about specific social services and social benefits available to them.  As the majority of GMI beneficiaries have the stat us of a needy person, they are eligible for several targeted services: GMI benefit, housing benefit, healthcare benefit (varies across municipalities), crisis benefit, material support to ensure social functioning and independent living, food packages, set  of individual aids for school, set of hygiene and household goods, ready meals, reduced electricity charges, reduced real estate tax, exemptions from patient co -payment for health care services, reimbursement of expenses for medicines or medical devices, State -provided legal aid, exemption from court costs, and reduced fees for different State institutions’ services (Ministry of Welfare, 2021a).  Aggregated statistics are available on total beneficiaries of these benefits, as well as on municipal expenditu re on housing benefit, healthcare benefit, meals, clothing, crisis benefit and other types of municipal social assistance (Ministry of Welfare, 2018; 2019; 2020). No data are available on how much of this expenditure applies to GMI beneficiaries, nor on th e share of GMI beneficiaries of all other beneficiaries.  4 