Governance mechanisms  Social inclusion policy – particularly poverty reduction - is a coordinating policy implemented under the responsibility of the Ministry of Welfare. It encompasses unemployment  reduction, State social benefits, social assistance, social insurance, social services, equal opportunities for disabled people , children and family rights  and  13 Information collec ted through consultation with a representative of the Ministry of Welfare on 15 November 2021.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  gender equality . In accordance with Article 14 of the Law on Social Services and Social Assista nce, the Ministry of Welfare develops and coordinates policy in social services and social assistance, monitors the usefulness of the use of State funds, and plans future funding. The procedure for receiving social assistance, including the level of GMI an d the procedure for granting the benefit, is determined by the Cabinet of Ministers.  The Law on Local Governments states that the provision of social assistance to the population is an autonomous function of local governments (as of 1 July 2021, there are 43 municipalities in Latvia). The GMI benefit is administrated by the municipal social services office and financed from the municipal budget. Municipal social services offices are responsible for assessing a person's income and living conditions, decidin g on granting social assistance and paying social benefits financed by the municipality. No other institutions are involved with social assistance benefits (including the GMI benefit). In turn, social services can be provided by the social services offices  or by another social service provider (e.g. non -governmental organisations (NGOs)). In 2018, 7  067 staff were involved in the provision of social services and social assistance, increasing to 7  250 in 2019 and falling slightly to 7  125 in 2020 (Ministry of Welfare, 2018; 2019; 2020).  The monitoring of social assistance, including the GMI benefit, is coordinated by the Ministry of Welfare. Municipalities must compile monthly data on beneficiaries of social assistance in accordance with a common national met hodology and submit them to the Ministry of Welfare. The Ministry is responsible for the processing and publication of data. Regulations of the Cabinet of Ministers of 30 June 2017 No 324 (Regulations on samples of official statistical forms in the field o f social services and social assistance and the procedure for filling in and submitting forms) determine the type of data that the Ministry of Welfare collects from municipal social services offices and social services providers.  The statistics on social s ervices and social assistance contain data on numbers of social services offices’ employees, their education, the social services provided by the municipality, numbers of clients and the funds used, data on payment of social assistance benefit by type (num ber of clients, funds used), numbers of needy persons, and social services offices maintenance expenses. There is no information on the specific use of the data gathered on social assistance and services, but such data are generally used in social policy p lanning and monitoring expenditure.  The Ministry of Economics and the Cross -Sectoral Coordination Centre supervises achievement of the objectives of social inclusion policy set in the Reform Programme EU 2020 and the National Development Plan 2020. As part  of that supervision, they collect statistical information on poverty reduction from the CSB and ministry information on the measures taken in the corresponding period. They do not assess the impact of those measures. The Social Inclusion Policy Coordinati on Committee is chaired by the Ministry of Welfare and is the only such cross -sectoral cooperation instrument in place. However, the issues discussed by the Committee are generally for information only, and it cannot assign binding tasks to the institution s involved in implementing the policy. An evaluation by the State Audit Office found that the Committee is not a sufficient tool to coordinate social inclusion as a separate policy in a cross -sectoral framework (State Audit Office, 2020).  Since 2015, the ESF project ‘Research and monitoring of inclusive labour market and poverty risks’ has been implemented by the Ministry of Welfare. The aim of this project is to establish a system for monitoring poverty and social exclusion (data and policy), to improve i nclusive labour market policies and support systems for people with disabilities, and to determine a methodologically sound and socioeconomically effective basket of subsistence goods and services. An annual evaluation of policies to reduce poverty and soc ial exclusion is carried out, with five monitoring studies on poverty and social exclusion to date, covering the period from 2012 to 2017 ( SIA Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  Jaunrades laboratorija , 2017; BISS, 2019; 2020; 2021). In addition to the general indicators of poverty and socia l exclusion for 2018, the fifth monitoring study thoroughly assessed the situation of GMI beneficiaries, including data for the year 2020.  In studies commissioned by public institutions (e.g. ministries), researchers are asked to develop feasible political, institutional, financial and legal recommendations on solutions and policy measures. One supervision mechanism is the Social Inclusion Policy Coordination Committee, to which the evaluation methodologies, results and recommendations are presente d. However, there are no specific mechanisms in place to ensure and monitor the implementation of the research studies’ recommendations. In practice, the recommendations are used for policy planning and developing research -based arguments for particular po sitions or decisions14.  The State Audit Office evaluates the implementation level of research studies’ recommendations in the framework of its audits and is entitled to ask public institutions to explain their reasons for failing to implement recommendati ons. A 2020 audit on the impact of national social inclusion policy on poverty reduction targets concluded that social inclusion policy is not implemented effectively (State Audit Office, 2020).  5 