Summary  Only one social assistance benefit corresponds to the common characteristics of minimum income schemes in Latvia: the guaranteed minimum income (GMI) benefit (pabalsts garantētā minimālā ienākuma līmeņa nodrošināšanai ). For a long time, Latvia did not have a methodology for determining the GMI level and the GMI thre shold was very low (until 2017, it was EUR 49 per month, in 2018 it was EUR 53, and in 2019 -2020 it was EUR 64). Since 2021, significant improvements have been made to the scheme. Firstly, a common methodology has been developed for setting the GMI thresho ld and will be reinforced in legislation until 2023. Secondly, a uniform GMI level is set across the country, with no variation by social group at municipal level. Thirdly, the GMI level is differentiated for the first person (EUR 109 per month) and for ea ch subsequent person in a household (EUR 76 per month). T hese policy measures can be seen as a progressive step towards reducing poverty and income inequality. Despite the increase of the GMI level, its adequacy remains a weak point.  In order to be eligib le for the GMI benefit, a person ’s monthly income level must first be assessed. If it is below the GMI level ( EUR 109 and EUR 76, respectively ), a person is entitled to the GMI benefit.  The GMI benefit is defined as the difference between the GMI threshold  and a person's net income, making the types of income considered in the means test an important set of criteria in determining the amount of the GMI benefit.  The GMI benefit is administered and financed by the municipalities, with GMI benefit recipients supervised by social workers at the municipal social services office. A common framework for needs assessment is set at national level, but each municipality ca n choose specific instruments for the assessment. In most cases, that assessment is based on document analysis. Together with a social worker, participants must agree their responsibilities to improve their situation, including active participation in job search and cooperation with the State Employment Agency (SEA) on an individual job search plan. There are no cooperation agreements between municipal social services and the SEA to promote employment opportunities, which is a weakness of the scheme.  To da te, the largest share of GMI beneficiaries comprises people of working age (39% in 2020, 38% in 2019) (Ministry of Welfare, 2019; 2020). To facilitate the integration of GMI beneficiaries into the labour market, the regulatory framework requires them to re gister as unemployed, attend monthly scheduled appointments with their SEA caseworker, participate in active labour market policy (ALMP) measures, accept suitable job offers (they may refuse once), and document at least three job applications in a two -mont h period. Failure to comply with these requirements can mean that a person loses their registered unemployed status and their entitlement to GMI benefit payments.  GMI beneficiaries are eligible for various social services and benefits targeting needy and l ow-income people. In Latvia, social services and social assistance (benefits) are not directly integrated at the administrative or individual social work level. The main types of social assistance provided for GMI beneficiaries relate to housing, healthcar e services, food, and support in crisis situations. Social services are provided on the basis of an individual assessment of a person’s needs and resources. There is no single assessment method and it tends to vary between municipalities.   Despite recent improvements, the threshold for the GMI scheme remains inadequate  as it is very low compared to other minimum income levels and poverty rates. Institutional and inter -sectoral cooperation, including assistance in accessing the labour market, does not cont ribute sufficiently to reducing the risk of poverty or social exclusion.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial su pport provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, s ummarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 