Links with labour market activation  All non -employed working -age GMI benefit recipients aged 15 -64 are required to register as unemployed at the State Employment Agency (SEA, the n ational public employment service (PES)) to actively seek work or training. Registration must be within one month of filing for benefits. After being registered, a person must sign an individual job search plan, similar to recipients of unemployment benefi ts. No exemptions were introduced under COVID -19, although registration must now be done by electronic correspondence or regular mail, or by bringing the application to the SEA mailbox. In 2018, the share of adults of working age (18 -64 years) was 48.7% of  all GMI beneficiaries, in in 2019 it was 47.4%, and in 2020 it was 47.2%. The share of non -working adult GMI beneficiaries aged 18 -64 years and potentially registered with the SEA was 38.7% in 2020, 39.1% in 2019, and 37.0% in 2018 (Ministry of Welfare, 2018; 2019; 2020).  The SEA grants a person the status of unemployed within one working day of submission of their application. They are then interviewed in order to create their profile, which an employment specialist uses to prepare an individual job searc h plan. The Support for Unemployed Persons and Persons Seeking Employment Law of 9 May 2002 does not specify the length of this procedure, but stipulates that the person is obliged to come to the SEA once to month to discuss the implementation of their individual job search plan.  Someone who is registered as unemployed may not miss their monthly scheduled appointments with their SEA caseworker without good reason. They are also obliged to participate in the ALMP measures specified in the individual job sear ch plan, cannot refuse suitable job offers more than once, and should document at least three job applications in a two -month period. Anyone failing to comply with these rules loses their status as registered unemployed and if they are a GMI beneficiary, t heir GMI benefit payments are terminated.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of  the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  The recipients of GMI benefit are under the supervision of a social worker at municipal level (social services office). Together with a social worker, participants must aim to improve their situation, including active participation in job search, and coope ration with the SEA. There are no cooperation agreements between municipal social services and the SEA to promote employment. The mutual cooperation between municipal social services and SEA is based on good governance principles11. In practice, this means that specialists of both institutions communicate directly to minimise the administrative burden for the person in need.   Supported by ESF funding, an in -depth assessment of the situation of GMI beneficiaries in Latvia was carried  out (Baltic Institute of Social Sciences (BISS), 2021). According to the project manager, the statistics compiled specifically for the study showed that GMI beneficiaries chiefly participate in temporary paid public works and ALMP measures for the long -term unemployed, with a very small proportion participating in ALMP measures to increase their competencies and/or to change their qualification (e.g. all types of training). Theoretically, it is possible to distinguish the GMI beneficiaries from other categ ories of unemployed, by integrating two different administrative databases – the database on GMI beneficiaries (gathered from the municipalities and then compiled by the Ministry of Welfare) and the database on participants in ALMPs (compiled by the SEA un der the responsibility of the Ministry of Welfare). Those kinds of data are not publicly available, however, and could be calculated only on demand. No data are available on waiting time before taking -up the first ALMP12. Whether a recipient of GMI benefit  continues to receive the benefit in full or in part depends on the ALMP measure. The means test excludes income from participation in ALMP measures that do not provide for the conclusion of an employment contract (e.g. all kinds of training). However, pay ment for participation in the ALMP measure ‘Paid temporary public works’ is considered, as is the grant for the monthly income of the unemployed within the framework of ALMP measures organised by the SEA for starting a business and self -employment ( Regulat ions of the Cabinet of Ministers No. 809) . If the person's income from participating in these ALMP measures is equivalent to the GMI level or more, the GMI benefit is suspended.  The GMI benefit is not suspended until the end of the benefit period (i.e. for  three months) if the household's financial situation has improved and household income has increased on the basis of income from employment, review of pensions and benefits, or economic activity. The amount of the GMI benefit is not reduced. The terminati on of the GMI benefit payment three  months after starting employment was introduced in 2017 and, during that time, the income of the individual in relation to the monthly minimum wage is disregarded. This can be seen as a tapering mechanism to smooth the t ransition from social assistance benefits to work, as well as a work stimulus.  3 