Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  In Lithuania, the minimum income support available to the poor population is regulated by the Law on Monetary  Social Assistance for Low -Income  Residents.1 The law provides the legal basis for providing monetary  social assistance , which includes social assistance  benefit  (socialinė pašalpa ) and reimbursement of the cost of heating, hot water and drinking water2 (būsto  šildymo  išlaidų, geriamojo vandens išlaidų ir karšto vandens išlaidų  kompensacijos ). The law lays down general eligibility criteria, condit ionality rules, and a formula for estimating the amount of social assistance  benefit and reimbursement of costs. However, the provision of monetary  social assistance is implemented by the municipalities.  Social assistance  benefit  is provided to people  living together,3 and single residents , who are unable to provide themselves with sufficient resources to live. This monthly  1 LR Piniginės socialinės paramos nepasiturintiems gyventojams įstatymas [Law on Monetary Social Assistance for Low -Income Residents of the Republic of Lithuania]. 1 July 2003, No IX-1675. URL: https://e -seimas.lrs.lt/portal/legalAct/lt/TAD/TAIS.215633/asr . 2 Persons living together or single persons who own a dwelling in a multi -dwelling building are entitled to support towards the cost of a loan taken out to finance the renovati on of the building, provided they participate in the modernisation project and they are entitled to the compensation for heating expenses.  3 People living together: spouses and their children (including adopted children) under 18; a married person who live s separately from their spouse but has minor children living with them; cohabiting adults, or emancipated minors and their children under 18 living with them. The concept of people living together also includes: (self -)employed adult children (up to age 24 ) whose monthly income does not exceed 1 x SSI or who are not working, unmarried and not raising their children, but are studying according to a formal education programme or in a higher education institution. Adult children (up to age 24) may be on academ ic leave during their studies due to illness or pregnancy. Also included in the concept of people living together: adult children (up to age 24) after completion of education and before the 1 September of the same year. If an adult child enters a higher ed ucation institution and the school/university year is scheduled to begin later than 1 September, they are included until the beginning of the postponed school year (Source: Law on Monetary Social Assistance for Low -Income Residents of the Republic of Lithu ania. No IX -1675. URL: https://e -seimas.lrs.lt/portal/legalAct/lt/TAD/TAIS.215633/asr .) Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  3  benefit is granted as a form of last -resort financial assistance, subject to eligibility criteria (in parti cular income and assets tests). The threshold for the income test is defined annually based on the state supported income ( SSI ), which is linked to minimum consumption needs ( MCN ).  Reimbursement for the cost of heating, hot water and drinking water  is mea ns-tested in the same way as social assistance benefit, but the income test and amount payable vary with claimants’ disposable income (after applicable deductions) and the costs of heating, hot and drinking water.  The assets test has been temporarily susp ended for both social assistance benefit and reimbursement of costs during the Covid -19 pandemic, and for six months after the end of the quarantine and extraordinary situation related to the pandemic, as well as at the initial stage of receiving monetary social assistance4.   1.1  Eligibility  The following eligibility criteria are defined in the Law on Monetary Social Assistance for Low -Income Residents.   Residence:  Monetary  social assistance is conditional on residence and can be received by: citizens of Lithu ania; those with a long -term permit to reside in Lithuania or in the European Union; citizens of a Member State of the EU or EFTA; or a family member with a right of residence in Lithuania who has been residing in Lithuania for at least three months (this condition is not applied in the case of employed residents and their families). Homeless people or those who do not have a valid address, but legally reside in Lithuania, can declare their residency in a municipality even without an address. Monetary  socia l assistance can also be provided to those who have been granted protection or asylum in Lithuania (under certain conditions).   Income test:  Income after deducting taxes, social contributions and applicable exemptions is averaged over the previous three months. It is then compared with the amount of the  SSI. The current threshold for the income test is 1.1 x SSI per person per month  in 2021 . The applicable exemptions include child benefit, several types of targeted compensation, some other types of social benefits , such as unemployment insurance benefit , monetary donations, and a proportion of earnings and earnings -related income  a. The size of the earnings -related income and unemployment benefit  disregard5 depends on family composition and ranges from 20% for single person or couples with no children to 40% for families with three or more children.   Assets test:  The assets test takes into account the value of real estate and movable assets, which may not exc eed a defined value. However, it has been temporarily suspended during the Covid -19 pandemic and will not be applied for six months after the end of the quarantine and extraordinary situation related to the pandemic. Thereafter, the assets test will not be  applied for at least three months for those  applying for the social assistance  benefit for the first time; or for those who reapply at least 24 months after the last receipt of social assistance benefit.  The assets test may restrict access to social assis tance for those with high -value assets. However, there was no sharp  4 I.e. at the end of this temporary provision, a permanent provision will enter into forc e according to which the property will not be valued for 3 months for those people who apply for the social benefit for the first time or 2 years after receiving the last support.  5 The size of the disregards varies from 20% for a single person to 40% for a family with three children or more.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  4  increase in the number of social assistance recipients registered in 2020 and 2021, when the assets test was not applied.   Willingness to work:  Those of working age who are unemployed must  be registered with the Employment Service or with another Member State’s employment service. These conditions do not apply to people caring for children under 3 (or 8 in some exceptional cases), people with disab ilities , those in education, and some vulne rable groups.  Registration with the Employment service as an unemployed person requires people to be actively looking for a job and to be willing to work (according to Article 24.4(5 -9) of the Employment Law of the Republic of Lithuania). However, people w ho have lost their status as a registered unemployed person according to the above article may ask for their registration with the Employment Service to be maintained as “people who lost their unemployment status” (according to Article 22.6 of the Employme nt Law of the Republic of Lithuania). In this case people may also keep their eligibility to receive social assistance benefit.   In addition,  municipalities can assign monetary social assistance recipients who are fit to work, but do not work and do not pa rticipate in active labour market policy (ALMP) measures through the Employment Service, to perform  socially useful activities (for up to 40 hours per month) , which often involves manual labour (e.g. sweeping streets, and other maintenance tasks in public areas and buildings). In cases of non -compliance, the social benefit can be withdrawn, except for children.  An application for monetary social assistance can be submitted through the online website ( www.spis.lt ) or by applying face -to-face to the municipality of the applicant’s place of residence. Municipalities may approve and implement their own procedures for the assessment of claims, which are not regulated by law. Although an application for monetary social assistance can be submitted online, and the documents required may be acquired through the information systems, additional documents are often required. An audit carried out in 2019 (National Audit Office of Lithuania, 2019) found that 86% of applicants ha d to submit physical documents that confirmed their eligibility when applying for social assistance. The same audit showed that 57.5% of electronic applications for social benefits were accepted in 2018, and 42.5% were rejected. The specific reasons for re jection were not indicated in the audit report; however, these may have been due to difficulties in filling out the forms, and to complicated eligibility rules of which the applicants might not have been fully aware. 95% of monetary social assistance appli cations were processed within one month, and one third of municipalities took a decision within fewer than seven working days.  1.2  Coverage  Social assistance benefit is received by around 2 -3% of the total population, whereas the at -risk -of-poverty rate was ar ound 20% during the last decade in Lithuania, and the share of people with income below the at -risk -of-poverty threshold (40% of the median equivalised disposable income) was 7.1% (Statistics Lithuania, 2020). Just 9.6% of those below the at -risk -of-povert y threshold received social assistance benefit in 2020 (an annual average of 57,741 recipients) and this varied substantially across municipalities (MoSSL, 2021; SPIS, 2021). Social assistance benefit was received on average for 7.3 months in 2020; 29.6% o f recipients received it for more than 12 months in a row, while 40.5% were short -term social assistance recipients (29.9% of beneficiaries returned to the social assistance system within a year in 2020).  Reimbursement for heating costs was received on av erage by 50,474 recipients, with an average duration of 5.6 months, in 2020; but less than half of these recipients were of working age (i.e., an annual average of 18,404 recipients aged 15 -64 in 2020) (ibid .). An assessment carried out by Matulionyte and Navicke (2018) showed that the strictness of social assistance conditions in Lithuania is tighter than the EU average Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  5  under all the analysed dimensions (i.e., strictness of means -testing; conditions for participation in the labour market; and limits on the  duration and amount of social assistance). The National Poverty Reduction Network ( www.smtinklas.lt ) has also repeatedly expressed concerns about the complicated nature of the social assistance law and the lack o f information for potential recipients. The audit of the social assistance system carried out in 2019 (National Audit Office of Lithuania, 2019) also highlighted the application procedures and gaps in information that lead to lower take -up.  Based on an as sessment of access to information on social assistance, municipalities scored on average of 4.6 points out of a possible 10 in 2020 (MoSSL, 2021). The assessment evaluated how the information on social assistance was shared on municipal websites and throug h other municipal information channels. In response, a new website ( www.kasmanpriklauso.lt ) was introduced by the Ministry of Social Security and Labour (MoSSL) in 2021.  One of the other main obstacles to accessing social benefits is strict income -testing (its low threshold). The threshold of 1.1 x SSI per month ( €140.80) in 2021 was well below the MCN and was only around 30% of the net minimum monthly wage. Hence few of those who may be consid ered as having low income have income below this level and qualify for social assistance. The requirements for those social assistance recipients who are in employment to work for at least two thirds of the normal working week or to earn at least two third s of the minimum monthly salary (MMS), and the requirement for the self -employed to have declared income at least equal to the MMS, exclude people who work fewer hours than the set threshold, unless they satisfy other eligibility conditions for social assi stance (e.g. they are full -time students). There are no statistics available on the extent of the phenomenon (Žalimienė et al., 2021).  There is little information on non -take -up of social assistance in Lithuania. The stigma of receiving social assistance, as well as of performing socially  useful activities, which often includes manual work (e.g. sweeping streets, and maintenance tasks in public areas and buildings) partly explain non -take -up. An assessment carried out by the MoSSL (2020) showed the non -take -up of social assistance benefit was around 20% (as of 2016). This rate fluctuates and is higher during periods of economic expansion and lower during economic crises (when there is probably with less stigma attached). The analysis was carried out based on  SILC6 survey data and microsimulation techniques using EUROMOD.7 The rate of non -take -up was higher among single people, and single parents with children, than among other family types (e.g., couples, and couples with children). Currently there is a res earch project on non -take -up of social assistance being carried out by the Mykolas Romeris University. The findings of the research are due in 2022.  1.3  Adequacy  The maximum amount of monetary social assistance is set using the SSI, which must not be less than  50% of the MCN reference basket.8 The amount of social assistance is  6 European Union statistics on income and living conditions.  7 A tax -benefit microsimulation model for the European Union.  8 The link between t he SSI and the MCN amounts is set in the following law: LR socialinės apsaugos išmokų atskaitos rodiklių ir bazinio bausmių ir nuobaudų dydžio nustatymo įstatymas (No X -1710). The SSI amount is set annually based on the following law: LR Vyriausybės nutari mas dėl socialinės paramos išmokų atskaitos rodiklių dydžių patvirtinimo (No 1206). The legal basis for estimating the amount of social assistance is set in the following law: Piniginės socialinės paramos nepasiturintiems gyventojams įstatymas [Law on Mone tary Social Assistance for Low -Income Residents] (No XI -1772).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  6  indexed to the MCN, which in turn is indexed to price changes and updated annually. The calculation of the MCN is based on national statistical data on household expenditure and nutriti onists’ information on minimum food requirements.  From 1 June 2020, the amount of social assistance benefit has been increased and differentiated depending on the duration of payment for a single person, as follows:   For the first six months: 100% of the d ifference between 1.4 x SSI per month and the actual income of a single person after applicable deductions (maximum €179.20 per month in 2021);   For months 6 -12: 100% of the difference between 1.2 x SSI per person per month and the actual income of a single  person after applicable deductions (maximum €153.60 per month in 2021);   After 12 months: 100% of the difference between 1.1 x SSI per person per month and the actual income of a single person after applicable deductions (maximum €140.80 per month in 2021 ).  The amount of social assistance  benefit for people  living together is:   100% of the difference between 1.1 x SSI per person per month and the actual income per family member after applicable deductions for the first family member (maximum €140.80 per month in 2021);   90% of the same difference for the second member (maximum €126.72 per month in 2021);   70% of the same difference for the third and any additional family members (maximum €98.56 per month in 2021).  The amount of social assistance  benefit pay able is reviewed every three months and depends on income, family composition, duration of benefit receipt, and employment status.  The maximum social assistance  benefit received by a single person in 2021 was as follows: in the first three months it was 4 1.67% of the at -risk -of-poverty threshold (based on 2020 SILC, i.e. €430); in months 6 -12 it was 35.7%; and after 12 months it was 32.7%. The maximum social assistance  benefit received by two adults and two children living together was 51.4% of the at -the-risk -of-poverty threshold.  The maximum social assistance  benefit received by a single person in 2021 was: in the first three months, 27.9% of the gross minimum wage (€642 in 2021); in months 6-12, 23.9%; and after 12 months, 21.9%. The maximum social assi stance  benefit received by two adults and two children living together was 36.2% of the gross minimum wage (if both adults earned the minimum wage).  The maximum social assistance  benefit received by a single person was: in the first six months, 38.2% of t he net minimum wage (€468.41 in 2021); in months 6 -12, 32.8%; and after 12 months, 30.1%. The maximum social benefit received by two adults and two children living together was 49.6% of the net minimum wage (if both adults earned the minimum wage).9  The costs of heating accommodation are reimbursed where they exceed 10% of the difference between disposable income (after applicable deductions) and  from January 2022,  2 x SSI per person for people  living together, or 3 x SSI for a single person The cost of d rinking water is reimbursed where it exceeds 2% of the disposable income (after applicable deductions) of people  living together or of a single person. The cost  9 An analysis of poverty traps by the MoSSL (2021b) indicated that the poverty traps were higher for families with more children and for those with lower earnings potential. For different house hold types, the poverty traps ranged from 28% to 60%, where at least one adult earned the minimum wage.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  7  of hot water is reimbursed where it exceeds 5% of the disposable income (after applicable deduc tions) of people living together or of a single person. The maximum reimbursable costs are based on the set standards for drinking water, hot water and size of accommodation.10 The problem of the adequacy of social assistance, and the need to bring it clos er to the MCN (which is also used as an absolute poverty threshold in Lithuania), has been highlighted both by the National Network of Poverty Reduction (NSMOT, 2021) and the National Audit Office of Lithuania (2019). As already indicated, the amounts of s ocial assistance are substantially below the at -risk -of-poverty threshold. Hence the benefit does not reduce the at -risk -of-poverty rate, but only its gap. The average total income of social assistance recipients (including all monetary social transfers an d earned income) was 69% of the MCN in 2020 (MoSSL, 2021). Although this proportion increased from 43% in 2017 to 69% in 2020, this reflects the low indexation of the MCN itself. Nevertheless, the average total income received by social assistance recipien ts remains substantially below the MCN and, therefore, the absolute poverty threshold.  1.4  Links with other benefits  Although this report focuses on the main minimum income support scheme as regulated by the Law on Monetary  Social Assistance for Low -Income  Residents, the following assistance can also be received by the   working -age low -income  population and their families: universal child benefit and additional child benefit; social assistance to pupils; educational stipends; a single person benef it; compensation for renting social housing or private accommodation; in -kind support for food and hygiene products; and other payments, compensation and in -kind goods and services (e.g., lump -sum, periodical, conditional or targeted social assistance paid  by municipalities; reduced fees for childcare; provision of essential clothing; and sauna vouchers). As a rule, regular social benefits are included in the income test for social assistance  benefit, except for: lump -sum, in -kind benefits; child benefit; a nd other types of benefits mentioned above and in Article 17.1(12) of the Law on Monetary Social Assistance for Low -Income  Residents.  Some of following benefits are deducted in the income -testing for social assistance: extraordinary grants and special soc ial allowances; targeted compensation for nursing or attendance (assistance) expenses; social grants and assistance paid under the Law on Social Services; grants for students at higher education and vocational institutions; training grants for the unemploy ed; compensation for part of housing rent or lease payments under the Law on Support for the Acquisition or Rental of Housing; and guardianship ( and child benefit paid under the Law on Benefits for Children.  The average total amount of all social transfers received by social assistance recipients was around 59% of the MCN in 2020 (MoSSL, 2021).11 This proportion has increased substantially since 2017, when it was 35% ( ibid .). However, this was mostly due to low indexation of the MCN itself. Neverth eless, the average total amount of all social transfers received by social assistance recipients, as well as their total income, remains substantially below the MCN and, therefore, the absolute poverty threshold.   10 The standard for drinking water, where a centralised heating supply system is used to produce hot water, is: 2 cubic metres for the first person livin g together or a single person; 1.5 cubic metres for the second person living together; and 1 cubic metre for the third and later persons living together. Where other types of energy or fuel are used to produce hot water, it is: 3.5 cubic metres for the fir st person living together or a single resident; 2.5 cubic metres for the second person living together; and 1.5 cubic metres for the third and later persons living together. The standard for hot water is: 1.5 cubic metres for the first person living togeth er or a single person; 1 cubic metre for the second person living together; and 0.5 cubic metres for the third and later persons living together. The standard size of accommodation subject to reimbursement of heating costs is: 50 square metres for a single  resident; 38 square metres for the first person living together; 12 square metres for the second person living together; and 10 square metres for the third and later persons living together.  11 MCN equalled to €257 per month in 2020.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  8  2 