Links with labour market activation  The sha re of adult social assistance recipients (those over 18 and below the statutory pension age) who received work -related income was 21.8% in 2018, 26.9% in 2019 and 32.4% in 2020 (MoSSL, 2021). Those of working age who are unemployed must be registered with the Employment Service or with another Member State’s employment service. These conditions do not apply to working -age people caring for children under 3 (or 8 in some exceptional cases), disabled people, those in education or training, and some other vuln erable groups. Refusal of a job offer, training, public duties or works supported by the Employment Fund may lead to the suspension or refusal of social benefit.  Social assistance recipients who register with the Employment Service are subject to the same  activation regime as other registered unemployed people. An individual employment plan is signed within 30 days of registration, lasting up to one year. 8,308 social assistance recipients registered with the Employment Service (10.5% of all working -age be neficiaries) in 2020 (MoSSL, 2021). This share was higher in 2018 and 2019 at around 25% -27% ( ibid .), possibly as a result of the COVID -19 pandemic and the introduction of a temporary job -seekers’ allowance (as the amount of the latter near -universal non -contributory benefit exceeded that of social assistance benefit). The share of social assistance recipients who participated in ALMP measures among all recipients registered with the Employment Service was 15% in 2018, 11% in 2019 and 11% in 2020 ( ibid .). T he share differed considerably from one municipality to another. There is no available information on participation in the most common ALMP measures, nor on the waiting times for participating in them for the first time. As of December 2021, an employment consultant at the Employment Service worked on average with 420 registered unemployed people.12  In addition, a municipality can assign social assistance recipients who are fit to work, but do not work and do not participate in the ALMP measures through th e Employment Service, to perform  socially useful activities, which often includes manual work (e.g. sweeping streets, and maintenance tasks in public areas and buildings). Refusal to perform  socially useful activities may result in suspension of benefit payment for household members, except for children.  58.6% of monetary  social assistance recipients who were registered with the Employment Service started a permanent job in 2020 (MoSSL, 2021). Recipients who start working are entitled to receive tapering support (additional social benefit). When a previously unemployed claimant of social assistance  benefit finds employment (after being registered as unemployed for six months), an additional social benefit is payable for a maximum period of 12 months. Its a mount varies depending on the duration of payment: 100% of the average amount of the social benefit paid during the last six months prior to employment, for the first three months; 80% for months 4 -6; 50% for months 7 -12. However, just 1.5% of all recipien ts who started work received additional social benefit in 2020 (this varied from 0 to 8% across municipalities) (ibid .). The results of the national audit carried out in 2019 also indicate that a small fraction of all newly employed beneficiaries received this additional benefit. This may be due to the fact that social assistance recipients lack information on their potential eligibility.  It may therefore be concluded that this additional benefit has only a small role in encouraging social assistance recip ients to take a job; and that those who start a job do it for other reasons (e.g. because the amount of social assistance  benefit is low and is reduced over time). The benefit amount is reduced for a single person able to work but not working, or the famil y of a person able to work but not working, who receives benefit over a long period, as follows: 20% after 12 months of payment; 30% after 24  12 Based on information provided by the Employment Service on request.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  9  months; 40% after 36 months; and 50% after 48 months. After 60 months the benefit is reduced by 50% and is paid in  kind until the recipient works or performs socially useful activities for 12 months over a 24 -month period.  There is no common integrated approach or co -ordination between social and employment services. However, since 2019 a pilot project on a new model of employment promotion and motivation services for recipients of social assistance  benefit has been implemented in selected Lithuanian municipalities.13 Six municipalities out of 60 have taken part in this pilot project since 2019 and 23 additional ones s ince 2020. The project is co -ordinated by the Employment Service and the MoSSL. The pilot project is targeted at long -term unemployed social assistance recipients. During the implementation of the project, case managers are appointed and case teams are cre ated from the representatives of the municipal social assistance units, the Employment Service, providers of social services, etc. The case manager performs an assessment of the needs and abilities of social assistance recipients. Based on this assessment,  the case team submits proposals on the choice of services, their scope, and the procedure for providing them to social assistance recipients. An individual agreement is signed, which specifies the rights, obligations and services provided, their scope, an d procedural issues. This is followed by the execution of the agreement and its supervision/monitoring, and amendments if necessary. Although the aim of the project is to integrate benefit recipients in the labour market, social, health and education servi ces are also used, which increases the availability of these services for the beneficiaries.  Participation in the pilot project is not mandatory and there are no sanctions for non -participation. Also, for beneficiaries who are already participating and tho se who do not comply with the signed agreement on the provision of services and integration into the labour market, the case team analyses why the agreement was not implemented. In this case, the case team adjusts the services provided or terminates the ag reement altogether.  About 1,900 individual plans had been signed by the end of September 2021. There is currently one case manager employed in each of the 29 pilot municipalities. Hence the average caseload per case manager is around 66 per year. It is est imated that the number of potential participants in the pilot project since its start was around 7,555 long -term unemployed social assistance recipients. Around 20% of the beneficiaries who participated in the project found employment between the start of the project in 2019 and September 2021.14 3 Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  The Law on Social Services15 makes municipalities responsible for organising social services and carrying out individual evaluations of needs for social services; municipalities set their own rules and procedures for social service provision. The Law on Monetary  Social Assistance for Low -Income  Residents of the Republic of Lithuania  13 Based on the following regulations: LR Socialinės apsaugos ir darbo ministro įsakymas Dėl užimtumo didinimo programos, skirtos užimtumo skatin imo ir motyvavimo paslaugų nedirbantiems ir socialinę paramą gaunantiems asmenims modeliui įgyvendinti, rengimo tvarkos aprašo patvirtinimo [On implementation of the pilot project for promotion of employment among social assistance recipients], 12 December  2018, No A1 -715 (URL: https://www.e -tar.lt/portal/lt/legalAct/930a5c00fe1811e8a969c20aa4d38bd4/asr ); and LR Socialinės apsaugos ir darbo ministro įsakymas Dėl uži mtumo skatinimo ir motyvavimo paslaugų nedirbantiems ir socialinę paramą gaunantiems asmenims modelio įgyvendinimo sąlygų ir tvarkos aprašo patvirtinimo [On procedures and conditions of the service model for promotion of employment among social assistance recipients], 13 May 2019, No A1 -269 (URL: https://e -seimas.lrs.lt/portal/legalAct/lt/TAD/b4908dc2767e11e99ceae2890faa4193/asr ).  14 Based on information requ ested from the MoSSL.  15 LR Socialinių paslaugų įstatymas [Law on Social Services]. 19 January 2006, No X -493. URL: https://e -seimas.lrs.lt/portal/legalAct/lt/TAD/TAIS.270342/asr . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  10  sets a requirement for social assistance recipients to participate in the employment programmes organised by municipalities.   The Directory of Social Services16 covers two groups of services: general and special. According to the Directory, the services ta rgeted at adults and children at social risk17 include the provision of general services, such as: information, counselling, mediation and representation; food, essential clothing and footwear; transport; socio -cultural services; and personal hygiene and c are. It can also include special social services such as: home help; services for development and recovery of social skills; provision of shelter and temporary accommodation; crisis management assistance; psychological help; and day care for children.  Targeting of social services is carried out by the social worker who performs the individual assessment of needs for social services in accordance with the Directory of Social Services. 53% of social assistance recipients received at least one type of social service in 2020 (mainly information or consultation services), while just 9% received at least three types of social service. The average monetary value of social services received by social assistance recipients was €144.90 per year in 2020 (MoSSL, 2021).  Individual needs assessments for social services are rarely carried out because they are not mandatory by law. There is no time limit for individual need assessments for social services enshrined in either the Law on Monetary Social Assistance for Low -Income Residents of the Republic of Lithuania or the Law on Social Services; municipalities set their own rules and procedures for social service provision. According to the study by the National Audit Office of Lithuania (2019), none of the 12 municipalities  examined carried out individual needs assessments or constructed individualised plans for social assistance recipients.  Individual assessment plans and case management are carried out under a pilot project for a new model of employment promotion and motiv ation services for social assistance recipients in 29 selected municipalities.18 During its implementation, case managers are appointed to each social assistance recipient who participates in the project; and case teams are created from the representatives  of the municipal social assistance units, the Employment Service and other providers of social services. (For more information on the pilot project see Section 2.)  As regards access to general services, social assistance recipients can receive the followi ng: free meals for pupils; support for school supplies; social stipends; and reduced fees for childcare. If a family is recognised as being at social risk, attendance at a pre -primary education institution is mandatory. Moreover, low -income residents are p rovided with additional child benefit, which could support access to some general services for children. Social assistance recipients do not need to pay compulsory health contributions, but are insured by the state to receive healthcare services. Access to  general services for social assistance recipients may be further promoted by  16 LR Socialinės apsaugos ir darbo ministras įsakymas Dėl socialinių paslaugų katalogo patvirtinimo [Directory of Social Services]. 5 April 2006, No A1-93. URL: https://e -seima s.lrs.lt/portal/legalAct/lt/TAD/TAIS.274453/asr . 17 People or families at social risk are those exposed to the factors that lead to social exclusion. People at social risk can be considered to be both socially excluded and socially vulnerable. Factors leadi ng to social exclusion are: lack or absence of motivation in the labour market; alcohol, drug or psychotropic substance abuse; addiction to alcohol, narcotics, psychotropic substances, or gambling; begging, vagrancy, or homelessness; a lack of social skill s by adult family members to properly care for and educate minor children; failure to ensure conditions for the full physical, mental, spiritual, moral development and safety of minors in the family; psychological, physical, or sexual abuse; exploitation f or trafficking in human beings; or involvement in or propensity to commit criminal offences (Based on the following law: LR Socialinių paslaugų įstatymas [The Law on Social Services of the Republic of Lithuania] 19 January 2006, No X -493. URL: https://e -seimas.lrs.lt/portal/legalAct/lt/TAD/TAIS.270342/asr .   18 See Section 2 for details.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  11  providing them with general social services, such as information provision, counselling, mediation and representation services.  On an aggregate level the monitoring of provision of social assistance and services is performed using data from the electronic social support information system ( socialinės paramos šeimai informacinė sistema – SPIS) ( http://vitrinos.spis.lt:8080/ ). The SPI S operates under co -operation agreements between the MoSSL and all municipalities in the country. The system is used both for administration and monitoring of social assistance and social services. It is used to register and collect information on social support provided by municipalities and to present this information broken down by municipality, type of support and group of beneficiaries. However, the information on social services is often inaccurate or missing. This database is currently not used for co-ordinating services at individual level or for case management. But there is a project to modernise the SPIS. Under the project, SPIS functionalities will be enhanced, including additional integration with external databases, as well as the launch of ele ctronic personal files that would enable the integrated provision of social assistance benefit and services by relevant providers to be co -ordinated. The project should be implemented by the end of 2023 (National Audit Office of Lithuania, 2021).  4 Governan ce mechanisms  Monetary  social assistance is governed by a national -level Law on Monetary  Social Assistance for Low -Income  Residents of the Republic of Lithuania. The provision of social assistance to poor residents is carried out by municipalities. The MoSSL co -ordinates, monitors and assists municipalities in the implementation of social assistance. The ministry oversees these general legal rules for the provision o f social assistance.19. This share was 55% in 2019 (MoSSL, 2020b).  The provision of social assistance needs to comply with the requirements established by the general law, but municipalities may have some discretion in defining the conditions for entitleme nt. They define procedures for granting and paying social assistance, and the conditions for granting social assistance in cases other than those provided for by the general law. The involvement of other stakeholders (communities, non -governmental organisa tions, etc.) in the procedures for granting social assistance, responsibilities and rights to the stakeholders is also foreseen at municipal level.  Social services are also provided to social assistance recipients at municipal (local) level. Social servic e units of the municipality as well as social service providers and NGOs can be involved in the provision of services. Employment services are provided by the local units of the Employment Service. There is no information on the number of workers directly involved in the provision of social and employment services to social assistance recipients.  Municipalities provide data on the provision of social assistance and services through the SPIS. These data are used for monitoring of social assistance. There are  two dedicated platforms for monitoring social assistance, as follows:   SPIS vitrinos20 provides detailed statistical information on social assistance expenditure and recipients, updated on a monthly basis. Breakdowns are available by type of benefit, municipality, region, level of urbanisation, age group, gender, number of children in the h ousehold, and household type.   A dedicated platform for monitoring social assistance effectiveness was launched in 2021 by the MoSSL.21 Monitoring is implemented centrally by the  19 €6.9 million out of this €156.3 million was not used for monetary social assistance and not reallocated to any social security area, but was transferred to the 2021 municipal budgets.  20 URL: http://vitrinos.spis.lt:8080/  21 URL: https://socmin.lrv.lt/lt/veiklos -sritys/socialine -statistika/socialines -paramos -veiksmingumo -stebesena -lietuvos -savi valdybese   