Summary  In Lithuania, the minimum income support available to the working -age population  is regulated by the Law on Monetary Social Assistance for Low -Income  Residents. The law provides the legal basis for providing monetary  social assistance, which includes socia l assistance  benefit and reimbursement for the cost of heating, hot water and drinking water  from municipalities . Monetary  social assistance is centralised in terms of eligibility criteria, conditionality rules and the formula for estimating the amount of social assistance  benefit and reimbursement of costs. However, the provision of monetary  social assistance is implemented by the municipalities.  The eligibility conditions for monetary  social assistance include residence, an income and assets test, and – for those fit to work – employment or willingness to work. The assets test has been temporarily suspended during the Covid -19 pandemic and for six months thereafter, as well as at the initial stage of receiving monetary  social assistance  (i.e. for the firs t three months for those applying for support for the first time) . Social assistance benefit covers only around 2 -3% of the total population, whereas around  20% of the population was at risk of poverty during the last decade in Lithuania. The share of thos e below the at -risk -of-poverty threshold who received social assistance  benefit was only 9.6% (an annual average of 57,741 recipients) in 2020. Low effective coverage of social assistance  benefit may be due to its strict conditions, low thresholds, stigma,  non -take -up, and information gaps.  The threshold for monetary  social assistance depends on household composition and the duration of its receipt and is set using the amount of the state supported income (SSI). The SSI must not be less than 50% of minimum consumption needs (MCN). The MCN is indexed annually to price changes. The amount of social assistance  benefit payable is the difference between the threshold and the disposable income of recipients after applicable deductions. This amount is reduced over time  for those of working -age and capable of working , but social assistance recipients who find employment may be eligible for extra payments. The adequacy of monetary  social assistance is low, and the maximum threshold needs to  be brought closer to the MCN (which is also used as an absolute poverty threshold in Lithuania).  In order to increase the coverage and adequacy of social assistance, provide more financial support to families raising children and motivate working age bene ficiaries to integrate into the labour market in 2020 –2021 amendments related with social assistance have been made: the limit of income (amount of SSI) establishing the right to social benefit has been increased; the amount of social benefit has been incr eased and differentiated depending on the duration of payment; the amount of additional social benefit after employment has been increased and differentiated depending on the duration of payment; part of the work income, not included in family income estab lishing person’s right to social assistance , was increased.  The reimbursement of costs covers those of heating, hot water and drinking water if they exceed a defined share of a recipient's disposable income after applicable deductions. The maximum reimburs able costs are established based on standards set for drinking water, hot water and the size of housing.  Recipients of social assistance  benefit who register with the Employment Service are subject to the same activation regime as other registered unemplo yed. In addition, municipalities can assign social assistance recipients who are fit to work, but who are not in work and do not participate in active labour market policy measures through the Employment Service, to perform unpaid community work  (i.e. ‘soc ially -useful activities’) , which often involve manual work.  However, individual needs assessments for social services are rarely carried out, because they are not mandatory by law. The information and statistics on the social services provided to social a ssistance recipients are very limited. The available data and research indicate that social services provided Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  2  to social assistance recipients are insufficient, are rarely based on an assessment of the individual needs of beneficiaries and  lack integration with employment services.  Although there is no common integrated approach or co -ordination between social and employment services, a pilot project for a new model of employment -promotion and motivation services for social assistance recipients has been im plemented in 6 out of 60 Lithuanian municipalities since 2019 and in 23 additional ones since 2020. The project is targeted at long -term unemployed social assistance recipients and shows some promising initial results.  The following sections, first, outli ne the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour marke t measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing pover ty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics o f the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which sup port needs to be targeted.  1 