Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  11  providing them with general social services, such as information provision, counselling, mediation and representation services.  On an aggregate level the monitoring of provision of social assistance and services is performed using data from the electronic social support information system ( socialinės paramos šeimai informacinė sistema – SPIS) ( http://vitrinos.spis.lt:8080/ ). The SPI S operates under co -operation agreements between the MoSSL and all municipalities in the country. The system is used both for administration and monitoring of social assistance and social services. It is used to register and collect information on social support provided by municipalities and to present this information broken down by municipality, type of support and group of beneficiaries. However, the information on social services is often inaccurate or missing. This database is currently not used for co-ordinating services at individual level or for case management. But there is a project to modernise the SPIS. Under the project, SPIS functionalities will be enhanced, including additional integration with external databases, as well as the launch of ele ctronic personal files that would enable the integrated provision of social assistance benefit and services by relevant providers to be co -ordinated. The project should be implemented by the end of 2023 (National Audit Office of Lithuania, 2021).  4 Governan ce mechanisms  Monetary  social assistance is governed by a national -level Law on Monetary  Social Assistance for Low -Income  Residents of the Republic of Lithuania. The provision of social assistance to poor residents is carried out by municipalities. The MoSSL co -ordinates, monitors and assists municipalities in the implementation of social assistance. The ministry oversees these general legal rules for the provision o f social assistance.19. This share was 55% in 2019 (MoSSL, 2020b).  The provision of social assistance needs to comply with the requirements established by the general law, but municipalities may have some discretion in defining the conditions for entitleme nt. They define procedures for granting and paying social assistance, and the conditions for granting social assistance in cases other than those provided for by the general law. The involvement of other stakeholders (communities, non -governmental organisa tions, etc.) in the procedures for granting social assistance, responsibilities and rights to the stakeholders is also foreseen at municipal level.  Social services are also provided to social assistance recipients at municipal (local) level. Social servic e units of the municipality as well as social service providers and NGOs can be involved in the provision of services. Employment services are provided by the local units of the Employment Service. There is no information on the number of workers directly involved in the provision of social and employment services to social assistance recipients.  Municipalities provide data on the provision of social assistance and services through the SPIS. These data are used for monitoring of social assistance. There are  two dedicated platforms for monitoring social assistance, as follows:   SPIS vitrinos20 provides detailed statistical information on social assistance expenditure and recipients, updated on a monthly basis. Breakdowns are available by type of benefit, municipality, region, level of urbanisation, age group, gender, number of children in the h ousehold, and household type.   A dedicated platform for monitoring social assistance effectiveness was launched in 2021 by the MoSSL.21 Monitoring is implemented centrally by the  19 €6.9 million out of this €156.3 million was not used for monetary social assistance and not reallocated to any social security area, but was transferred to the 2021 municipal budgets.  20 URL: http://vitrinos.spis.lt:8080/  21 URL: https://socmin.lrv.lt/lt/veiklos -sritys/socialine -statistika/socialines -paramos -veiksmingumo -stebesena -lietuvos -savi valdybese   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  12  MoSSL using information from the SPIS, but also from the Employment Services, Statistics Lithuania and other sources. Monitoring is conducted using a composite index, which consists of three dimensions: social assistance, prevention, and poverty reduction. The monitoring platform is updated on an annual basis.  The monitoring of pot entially fraudulent claims for monetary  social assistance is carried out by municipalities. In the event of reasonable suspicion that data on income or assets are concealed or incorrect, specialists are required to notify the relevant authorities. Also, mu nicipal employees have the right to periodically check the living conditions, assets, and employment status of social assistance recipients. There are no reports on the numbers of fraudulent cases identified and/or the amounts of benefit reclaimed in these  cases.  There is no special legal framework that underpins the right to appeal against administrative decisions relating to social assistance. The decision of the municipality regarding the granting or non -granting of social assistance may be appealed agai nst in accordance with the procedure established by the Law on Administrative Proceedings. The complaint has first to be examined by the Administrative Disputes Commission and then can be brought to an administrative court.  5 Impact of minimum income scheme  The operation of the system of social assistance is reviewed annually, and on an ad hoc basis, by the MoSSL. The National Poverty Reduction Network provides annual reviews of the situation as regards poverty and social exclusion, which also cover social as sistance. Furthermore, there are other institutions and researchers performing ad hoc monitoring.  The MoSSL (2021) has highlighted the fact that the effectiveness of social assistance provision is similar across municipalities. There were no substantial ch anges in the overall effectiveness of the system between 2017 and 2020. Among the positive tendencies were: an increase in the total income of social assistance recipients relative to the MCN, from 43% in 2017 to 69% in 2020; an increased percentage of soc ial assistance recipients finding work; and also a 6% increase in the number of those waiting for social housing who received it, and an increased (while still low) percentage receiving partial rent compensation. Among the negative tendencies were: a reduc tion in the percentage of social assistance recipients (from 61% in 2017 to 53% in 2020) who received at least one social service type per year; and also a fall in the percentage of those social assistance recipients who took part in ALMP measures out of a ll those recipients registered at the Employment Services (from 28% to 11%) (ibid .). This indicates an insufficient provision of social and employment services to social assistance recipients. Municipalities used their discretion over provision of addition al social assistance to a very different extent (i.e. from 1% to 50% of the total social assistance amount). The MoSSL highlights the fact that although the at -risk -of-poverty rate is high in Lithuania, social benefit is received by only 2 -3% of the countr y’s population.22  The National Network of Poverty Reduction (2021) has highlighted the problem of the inadequacy of social assistance, and the need to bring it closer to the MCN, which is also used as an absolute poverty threshold in Lithuania. The organi sation also recommends promoting the employment of recipients through positive incentives, and points out that the conditions for receipt of social assistance are too strict. The organisation proposes the elimination of socially useful activities by social  assistance recipients, which often includes manual work, and its replacement with personalised  22 The overview of the monitoring of social assistance effectiveness is published here: https:/ /socmin.lrv.lt/lt/naujienos/socialine -parama -salies -savivaldybese -turime -sektinu -pavyzdziu -atskirose -socialines -paramos -srityse .  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  13  and comprehensive social services. The National Audit Office of Lithuania (2019) has also emphasised that social assistance is below the MCN level, and that the  provision of social assistance and services is not sufficiently integrated and tailored to the needs of beneficiaries. Both single out a lack of social services that promote employment. Other problems emphasised include: the information on social assistan ce provided to people is too complicated; there is a failure to identify those on low income; and there are insufficient indicators and evaluation methods to draw conclusions about social assistance.  As already mentioned, social assistance benefit covers o nly around 2 -3% of the total population, whereas the at -risk -of-poverty rate was at around 20% during the last decade in Lithuania. The share of those below the at -risk -of-poverty threshold who received social assistance  benefit was 9.6% (an annual average  of 57,741 recipients) in 2020. The low coverage of the social assistance  benefit may be due to its strict conditions, low thresholds and stigma (Matulionyte and Navicke, 2018). An assessment carried out by the MoSSL (2020) showed the non -take -up of social  assistance benefit was around 20% in 2016. This undermines the goals of poverty reduction and of the effective provision of minimum income support in Lithuania. Further research results on the non -take -up of social assistance, by Mykolas Romeris Universit y, are due in 2022.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the eff ectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February , 2022  14  6 