Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  There is no legal definition of poverty in Luxembourg. However, Luxembourg does apply the EU definition of relative poverty risk – for which the threshold is defined as 60% of the median income – as well as the EU definition of social exclusion. According to Eurostat, 17.4% of the population in Luxembourg in 2020 were at risk of poverty or  social exclusion (AROPE) after social transfer s1. The Social inclusion income ( Revenu d’inclusion sociale : REVIS) was introduced following the law of 28 July 2018. The REVIS thus ensures basic means of subsistence for its recipients. This is understood to be determined in relation to the essential it ems and corresponding amounts of the reference budget calculated by STATEC (however, the REVIS law has no explicit mention of the reference budget)2. A reference budget is  1 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics -explained/index.php?title=Living_conditio ns_in_Europe_ -_poverty_and_social_exclusion#Poverty_and_social_exclusion   2 Interview with CNDS representative (Comité National de Défense Sociale)  Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  defined as a priced basket of goods and services that ensures a decent standard of living in society3.  REVIS is made up of the social inclusion benefit and the activation benefit. For instance, individuals in full -time employment can claim the social inclusion benefit to reach the threshold set by the REVIS and reduce  the risk of  in-work poverty. The REVIS replaces the RMG ( Revenu minimum garanti ) which was introduced in 1986. Compared to the RMG, the REVIS is more activation -oriented notably with the introduction of mandatory employability screening/skills profiling for all adult household members (aged 25 to 65) receiving the minimum income.  The threshold of the REVIS is defined in Article 5 of the REVIS law of 28 July 2018. The total benefit due for a single adult was left mostly unchanged compared the one defined under the RMG4. That single adult thresh old was, similarly to the REVIS, regularly adapted in line with adaptations to the minimum wage and minimum pensions. The levels of minimum wage and minimum pensions back then influenced the threshold set in the RMG law. However, this threshold was not def ined as a fixed proportion of minimum wage. All other thresholds in the REVIS law are defined based on the single adult benefit, in alignment with the OECD modified equivalence scale5. The number of REVIS recipients and the level of public expenditure hav e remained stable between 2019 and 2020.   2019: 10,377 recipients; total expenditure of €178 million.   2020: 10,663 recipients; total expenditure was €184.0 million.6  No changes were made to the REVIS law in response the Covid -19 pandemic.  However, financial state aid was provided to   furloughed workers ( chômage partiel ) which allowed certain households to maintain their income to a large extent without the need to ap ply for REVIS.  1.1  Eligibility  Take -up of the REVIS is dependent on individual requests. The REVIS application process is managed by the Fonds national de solidarité  (hereafter: FNS). However, there is no administrative or inter -institutional cross -checking of  personal data to identify and reach those people who may be eligible for the REVIS.  According to Articles 7 to 10 of the REVIS law, the following assets must be declared for means -testing:   professional income (i.e. wages and salaries);   replacement inco me (monetary benefits for sickness, maternity, unemployment, work -related accident or illness, parental leave allowance, etc.);   pensions received (whether from Luxembourg or abroad);   benefits received as part of an employment programme run by ADEM – the Public Employment Service (PES) in Luxembourg   rent received on owned property (e.g. an apartment, a house, a parking space);   maintenance/support payments; direct or indirect donations made by the applicant or beneficiary   3 https://statistiques.public.lu/en/methodology/methodes/social -conditions/Cond -vie/reference -budgets/index.html   4 Interview with LI SER on 24 November 2021  5 Information obtained from ONIS on 23 November 2021  6 FNS rapport d’activité, 2020. Note that the population of Luxembourg was 620,001 in 2019 and 632,275 in 2020 according to the World Bank.  Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4   inherited assets (i.e. financial as sets, property assets).  As per the above, REVIS applicants must declare their full gross income and all other financial assets, as well as those of their household members.  All the above -mentioned elements are deemed to constitute the extent of an applican t’s income and wealth and thus serve to calculate REVIS entitlements.   The following incomes are not taken into account in the calculation of the REVIS7:  family benefits ( allocations familiales );  back -to-school allowance;   birth allowance;   special allowan ce for severely disabled people;   long -term care insurance payments (in cash);   the earned income of a person  under 25 , until and unless it is equal to the maximum social inclusion benefit for an adult;   State financial aid (e.g. allocation vie chère  or cost -of-living benefit, financial aid for housing.), aid from social welfare offices and other private social welfare charities.  Regarding individual reviews of the MI amount , REVIS recipients must immediately report to the FNS8 any change in their circumstanc es which might affect their right to REVIS. Restitution of the inclusion benefit can be requested if relevant changes in circumstances are not reported by the recipients.  A new key design feature of the REVIS  is the partial exemption of professional replac ement9 or pension earnings (article 9(3) of the REVIS law), allowing recipients to have 25% of their professional earnings excluded from the REVIS calculation to incentivise work intensity and make work pay10. Regarding eligibility to apply for REVIS, the following criteria apply:   Legal residence in Luxembourg:  Having resided in Luxembourg for at least 5 years during the last 20 years (except for Luxembourgish nationals, nationals of an EU/EEA Member State, Swiss nationals, refugees and stateless  persons). No distinction is made between temporary and permanent residence. The recipient must have a right of residence in Luxembourg, where they must be registered and regularly reside. Refugees are eligible, but not asylum seekers.   Age: Minimum 25 yea rs-old for an independent application. Dependents under 25 and children living in the same household as their parents receive REVIS benefits through them. There are however conditions for people under 25 to benefit as adult recipient of the REVIS, regardle ss of whether they have left the parental home. Persons under 25 years of age , not receiving family benefits and therefor e inadmissible for benefits as child of the household,  may claim REVIS if they:  - are raising a child for whom they receive family allowances; or  - are at least 7 months pregnant (a medical certificate will be required, showing the expected delivery date); or  - are over 18 years of age and, due an illness or a disability, are unable to earn a living to the standard set by law; or   7 https://guichet.public.lu/en/citoyens/sante -social/action -sociale/aide -financiere/revenu -inclusion -sociale -REVIS.html   8 The National Solidarity Fund (Fonds national de solidarité)  9 Replacement earnings ( revenu de rempalcement ) relate to financial compensation for (temporarily) incapacitated workers.  10 https://legilux.public.lu/eli/etat/leg/loi/2018/07/28/a630/jo   Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  - are a ca rer (home care worker) for a person receiving long -term care insurance.   Fitness for work:  Each adult applicant aged  below 65 undergoes mandatory initial screening and a skills profiling by ADEM upon receipt of a REVIS application. This initial screening a llows ADEM to comment on the applicant's ability to integrate into the primary employment market. Claimants directed to the ADEM must be looking for employment and be and remain registered as a jobseeker with the ADEM to receive the REVIS, otherwise the RE VIS may be withdrawn (see sanctions in Section 2). Claimants who are deemed not job -ready straightaway are referred to the ONIS for personalised activation and social inclusion support.   Receipt of / eligibility for other benefits:  The REVIS serves to top u p the difference between the household's total gross income and the state -calculated minimum income scale  . As such, it may be claimed by households below the threshold  set under the minimum income scale  regardless of the other benefits (e.g. family allowa nce) they are entitled to.  The eligibility criteria theoretically ensure good coverage of all people in need of minimum income support.  1.2  Coverage  There are currently no official figures on REVIS (non) take -up as there are no mechanisms to monitor it11. REV IS being a household benefit  (with household income as the determining factor of eligibility), whereas  the people at risk of poverty threshold refers to  individuals, t hat comparison would not allow to obtain that number. For households that  do not claim be nefits, the total household income as well as detailed household composition is unknown to the administrations, so a precise calculation of non -take -up figures is impossible12.  There have never been any public information campaigns to ensure full take -up among those potentially in need of the REVIS. It has however been reported that beneficiaries of international protection (who are exempt from the normal 5 -year residency requirement) are systematically referred to social services . Social services in quest ion will provide them with information on how to apply for the REVIS.  According to FNS figures, a total of 10,377 households benefited from the REVIS in 2019 and 10,663 in 202013. It has also been reported that waiting times are now shorter since the intro duction of the REVIS, with applications taking on average four weeks to process. Importantly, the reform of the minimum income scheme in Luxembourg aimed to improve institutional coordination14.  Table 1.  Households receiving the REVIS in 2019 and 2020, and associa ted costs   Number of households  Expenditure (in million €) 2019  2020  2019  2020  Inclusion benefit  9,690  10,138  151.7  155.7   11 The latest estimate of non -take -up was made in 2007. Up to 65% of households entitled to the RMG (former MI scheme) do not apply for it. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1979277    12 ONIS Director – email of 9 November 2021.  13 FNS rapport d’activité, 2020  14 Interview with ONIS representative.  Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6   Number of households  Expenditure (in million €) 2019  2020  2019  2020  Activation benefit  1,355  1,433  26.3  28.3  Total*  10,377  10,663  178.0  184.0  *Note: the total number takes into account households that receive both the inclusion and activation benefits, (i.e. these are only counted once).  There is a payback clause associated with the social inclusion benefit: individuals who sell assets or inherit money are required to pay back the benefit. There is no exact financial threshold that triggers the payback clause. It has been pointed out that this payback clause may inhibit take -up of REVIS; this hypothesis can be tested in the forthcoming evaluation of the REVIS scheme.  1.3  Adequacy  The REVIS comprises a social inclusion benefit ( allocation d’inclusion ) and an activation benefit ( allocation d’act ivation ).  The activation benefit  provides support for the person who participates in activation measures as part of an activation plan or agreement and not a traditional employment contract. The activation benefit is paid monthly based on the hourly minim um wage15 (€12.08 gross per hour in 2019 ; €12.38 in 2020; €13.05 in 2021 ) multiplied by the number of hours the person works. The activation benefit is subject to social contributions as with normal wages and salaries (health insurance, pension, long -term care).  The social inclusion benefit  is financial assistance to cover essential living expenses for people16 whose income is below the “ minimum vital ” threshold, or subsistence level17. This typically supports individuals who have signed an activation agree ment with ONIS, but – crucially – is not limited to them. Individuals who are unable to work for medical reasons and even workers in full -time employment may claim the social inclusion benefit to reach the minimum amount guaranteed by the REVIS. The thresh old of the REVIS social inclusion benefit is defined by law (Article 5), and regularly adapted, in alignment with adaptations to the minimum wage, which itself is indexed to the evolution of the average wage in Luxembourg. The REVIS social inclusion benefi t for a single person household is set below the minimum wage, with benefit increasing for each additional adult or child in the household on the basis of the OECD modified equivalence scale18.  The social inclusion benefit comprises:  -    a basic flat rate amount per adult;  -    a basic flat rate amount per child;  -    an increased amount per child in case of single -parent household;  -    an amount for common household expenses ;  -    an increased amount for common household expenses in cases where there are childre n.  15 SSM: salaire social minimum  16 As per the referen ce budget, essential living expenses cover: healthy food, clothing, personal hygiene, housing, mobility, social life, lifelong learning, and special needs of children.  17 https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=1120&intPageId=4686&langId=fr   18 https://www.oecd.org/els/soc/OECD -Note -EquivalenceScales.pdf   Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  Table 2.   Monthly payable amounts (in €) – 2019 -2021   2019  2020  2021  1 Oct 2021  Single adult  733.13  751.46  772.49  791.80  Per child  227.63  233.32  239.83  245.82  Additional payment per child for single parent households  67.27  70.88  70.88  72.65  Flat rate for common household expenses  733.13  751.46  772.49  791.80  Flat rate increase for a household with one or more children  112.78  112.78  115.95  118.85  The amount of the social inclusion benefit is the difference between the REVIS (€791.80 per adult since 1 October 2021) and the total resources eligible for the means -test (75% of earned income, replacement income or pension income excluding benefits). The  final amount also varies according to the composition of the household.  For example, a household with 2 adults and 3 children aged 5, 7 and 13, in which one adult is registered as unemployed with the ADEM employment services and the other one is in full -time employment, but does not reach the threshold set by the REVIS, may receive the following monthly benefits:  - According to the scale, the household can benefit of two flat rate amount for adults (2 X €791,80), one flat rate for household expenses (1 X €7 91,80), one increase for households with children (1 X €118.85)  and three flat rate amounts for children (3 X €245,8), for a total of €3.231,68  - Full time employment at minimum wage corresponds to a monthly gross income of € 2.256,95 , which is taken into account at 75%. From the maximum foreseen in the scale need to be deducted €1692,71.  - The inclusion allowance for the household will be € 1538.97  Child benefits are paid on top of the basic REVIS. These start at €265 per child per month and increase wit h age (€285 for 6 to 11year -olds; €315 from the age of 12 onwards. The maximum is €1,910.80 for 5 children. In addition to child benefits, REVIS recipients may also claim support payments for health insurance, invalidity insurance and the special cost -of-living benefit ( allocation de vie chère ). The indexation of REVIS  is made according to the evolution of consumer  prices in the reference budget. Luxembourg has an automatic wage indexation system based on a basket of around 8,000 goods and services that are divided into  255 categories. When the consumer  price index increases by 2.5%, the REVIS is normally adjusted by the same proportion. The index is calculated according to actual household consumption data (reference basket) from the previous semester. A s an example, in 2021, the REVIS rose by 2.8% compared to the previous year.  1.4  Links with other benefits   The REVIS recipients followed by ONIS benefit from the support services of the regional social inclusion agents who are exclusively competent to deal wi th REVIS recipients. ONIS assesses and provides further support to REVIS recipients on a needs -basis , allowing to increase take -up of additional benefits foreseen in the minimum income package . There are several in -kind benefits associated with the REVIS, although they are not exclusive to REVIS recipients. These in -kind benefits are:  Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  - Access to language, literacy and ICT classes for a fee of just €10 per course (regular value between €100 and €348)19  - Access to childcare service vouchers ( Chèque service acc ueil ); either free or at significantly reduced rates for up to 60 hours a week, with increased availability for participation in activation measures20  - Free access to medical and dental care  - Free legal assistance (just as with other claimants with insuffic ient resources)21 22 - Culture -for-all passport (just as e.g. other residents who meet the criteria for the cost -of-living allowance),   - Subsidised grocery shopping ( Epiceries sociales ): groceries and basic goods with prices on average two -thirds lower than normal retail prices.  - Regarding financial benefits, the housing or rent subsidy is now cumulable with REVIS. This was not the case under the RMG which included a financial top up for housing for those recipients in need of it . The housing or rent subsidy r anges from €134 to €294 depending  on the composition and earnings of households23. There is however no separate state subsidy that cover energy bills, which can be an issue in poorly insulated homes24. - With REVIS payments being higher than under the predecessor RMG scheme for households with children and single parent households, with the housing subsidy now cumulable with the REVIS, the overall support provided to minimum income recipients in Luxembourg is satisfactory, but there is possibly room for  improvement25.    2 Link with labour market activation  The main novelty of the REVIS is that in each applicant household all adult individuals aged below 65 and able to work must undergo an initial screening and a skills profiling by the public employment service (ADEM). This interview allows ADEM to assess the extent of the applicant's job -readiness or ability to integrate the primary labour market.  Applicants deemed suitable for entering the primary labour market, or considered as ‘job ready’, are registe red with ADEM and monitored as jobseekers. As such, ADEM’s services for REVIS recipients are the same as for other jobseekers. Like with other jobseekers, REVIS recipients benefit from regular guidance and counselling services and have access to the ADEM J ob Board to apply for suitable employment offers26. To continue receiving the REVIS, applicants must remain registered as jobseekers and actively seek employment.  REVIS applicants with specific needs in terms of social and professional activation are directed by ADEM to ONIS (National Office for Social I nclusion) where they develop an activation plan with a regional social inclusion agent. It takes approximately one month from the first ONIS meeting for an activation plan to be drawn up.   19 https://guichet.public.lu/en/citoyens/immigration/nouveau -resident -luxembourg/ecole -langues/cours -langues.html     20 https://guichet.public.lu/en/citoyens/famille/parents/garde -enfants/cheque -service.html   21 https://guichet.public.lu/en/citoyens/sante -social/action -sociale/assistance -judiciaire/demander -assistance -judiciaire .html   22 https://guichet.public.lu/en/citoyens/loisirs -benevolat/culture -tourisme/activites -culturelles -lux/demande -kulturpass.html   23 https://revis.public.lu/fr/autres -aides -etat.html   24 Interview with CNDS representative  25 Interviews with CNDS representative and LISER representative  26 Interview with ADE M on 9 November 2021  Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  An ONIS activation plan is usually intended to improve capabilities and employability of the REVIS recipients with specific needs and increase their chances of finding employment in the primary labour market. This activation plan is concluded for one year and can be renewed. If necessary, a new activation plan can be estab lished at any time.  REVIS recipients are usually placed on one or more of the following activation and social support measures according to their personal ONIS activation plan:  - Public works (known as travaux d'utilité collective  – TUC)  - Preparatory measur es (e.g. language classes, skills assessments, basic skills acquisition, practical training) to support activation  - Medical treatments and other rehabilitation measures intended to restore or improve fitness for work.  REVIS recipients who have become able to integrate into the primary labour market are referred back to ADEM by ONIS and are then required to register with ADEM and to actively seek employment.  Regarding sanctions , the FNS may suspend or terminate payment of the REVIS if it finds that the cond itions required to receive the REVIS are no longer met by the recipient, particularly after prior notification from either ADEM or ONIS. The targeted behaviours are:   non -compliance with the commitments or the schedule of steps set out in the ONIS activatio n plan;   refusal to participate in the measures of the ONIS activation plan;   failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the signed activation plan;   unjustified absence from an appointment fixed by either ADEM or ONIS.  For recipients referred to ONIS , the sanctions are gradual and in 3 stages whereby the person first receives a written warning, then has their REVIS reduced by 20% in case of a repeat offense, and eventually has their REVIS suspended for reoffending a third time.  Usually, the first wri tten warning is enough to ensure there are no further sanctions owing to repeat  offences.  However, the REVIS may be entirely suspended in the event of a serious offence, described as any act or behaviour that makes it immediately impossible for the recipie nt to maintain a relationship with ONIS workers.  There is no tapering of the REVIS  in the usual sense , namely according to the level of earnings or work intensity. However,  the novelty of the REVIS is that 25% of recipients’ earnings is discounted from the  calculation of the REVIS to incentivise recipients to increase their work intensity. People continue to receive the REVIS as a top up benefit until their earnings reach the threshold set by law for the individual household composition . On average, 40% of REVIS applicants are directed to ADEM and 60% to ONIS. The new obligation to undergo screening under REVIS has resulted in an uptick in the number of registered jobseekers in Luxembourg. Similarly, the number of people in subsidised employment (TUC) is rep orted to have increased since the introduction of REVIS27. In other words, the obligation for all adult household members to undergo screening under REVIS serves to tackle inactivity  and low work intensity in households.  A potential limitation of the curre nt system is that REVIS recipients followed by ONIS are not registered as jobseekers with ADEM. This complicates the possibility of  27 Rapport d’activité ONIS 2020, p. 186  Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  monitoring in an efficient manner the labour market trajectories of REVIS recipients followed by ONIS, and ultimately the ef fectiveness of REVIS in facilitating the labour market integration of recipients. Another issue is that REVIS beneficiaries followed by ADEM are monitored as regular jobseekers, which does not make it possible to isolate the labour market trajectories of R EVIS recipients from ADEM monitoring data.  3 Access to services and integrated provision of targeted social services  Beyond the financial support provided by the REVIS, further targeted social support is offered by ONIS to those REVIS recipients who are con sidered not to be job -ready following the initial screening and skills profiling carried out by ADEM.  REVIS recipients directed to ONIS benefit from a multi -dimensional needs assessment carried out by regional social inclusion officers. On this basis,  REVI S recipients can be eligible for in -kind service vouchers. Some of the advantages of this setup include:  - accessibility and proximity of the agents  - personalised support by a social worker  - tailor -made activation plans   REVIS recipients directed to ONIS are assigned a regional social inclusion officer employed by the social welfare offices to provide intensive activation support. In theory, there is at least one regional social inclusion officer in every social welfare of fice (organised per municipality or agglomeration of over 6,000 inhabitants28) with a caseload foreseen not to exceed 100  (there were 78 officers as of December 202029).  The responsibilities of regional social inclusion officers are as follows30:  deal with the caseloads obtained from the ONIS;   develop with the REVIS recipients referred by the ONIS a personal activation plan and review it on a regular basis;   place REVIS recipient on the relevant social support and activation support measures (as describe d in Section 2);   ensure the smooth running of the social support and activation support measures by means of regular contact with the recipient and the supervisor of the support measure;   identify recipients with incapacity to work and refer them to the rel evant specialist occupational health services to undertake an assessment;   manage the cases of people exempted from participating in activation measures.   collaborate with the other services of the social welfare office as well as with other social services in touch with the recipients, allowing for a coordinated approach   identify recipients which are job -ready and direct them to ADEM   Regarding placement on activation and social support measures, the ONIS regional inclusion officers refer REVIS recipients31 to various service providers, such as NGOs and language learning or training centres. As part of monitoring, these service providers liaise regularly with the regional inclusion officers to monitor and evaluate the progress made by the placed recipients tow ards job - 28 Follow up email from CNDS representative, 8 December 2020  29 FNS rapport d'activité 2020  30 https://onis.gouvernement.lu/fr/onis/organigramme/agents -regionaux -inclusion -sociale.html   31 Note: household members who underwent initial screening/skills profiling and who then were directed to ONIS  Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  readiness32. The ONIS budget for targeted activation services provided by regional social inclusion agents was  €9.4 million in 2020.  REVIS recipients followed by the ONIS may be exempted, either partially or entirely, from participation in one or  more activation measures , where required , on the advice of experts accredited to assess the physical or mental health and the social or family situation of the recipients. REVIS recipients with recognised physical or mental health problems or problem fami ly situations may be exempted from participating in ONIS activation measures. Partial or total exemptions may also apply for:  - REVIS recipients raising a child for whom they receive benefits and whereby conditions in relation to childcare prevent the comple tion of the activation measures;  - REVIS recipients involved in long -term care of dependents or relatives;  - REVIS recipients completing secondary education studies (general or vocational).   Annually, it is estimated that around 1,000 new cases are referred to ONIS, and the total number of ongoing cases is around 6,000. In 2020, 1,136 REVIS applicants were referred to ONIS for an initial meeting with a regional social inclusion agent. Of these 1,136 individual referrals, 982 personalised activation plans were si gned with individual REVIS recipients33. As of December 2020, there were 78 regional social inclusion agents (59 full time equivalent) working with ONIS34. A full-time social inclusion agent has 87 cases to deal with on average35.  4 