Summary  The different national measures in the fight against poverty in Luxembourg are not limited to income poverty, and all aim at either social inclusion or the decrease of the relative poverty risk, which is based on the AROPE (at risk of poverty and exclusion) concept.  It is on that basis that the several benefits, in -kind and in -cash, contribute to this goal, forming a minimum income package comprising  among others : • Social inclusion income (Revenu d’inclusion sociale – REVIS) , conferring basic means of existence combined with social and professional activation measures  • Cost-of-living benefit ( allocation de vie chère ) for low -income households, including REVIS beneficiaries  • Various tax credits depending on gross salaries or income, including “ social minimum wage tax credit ” and “single -parent tax credit”  • Access to adult la nguage courses  with reduced registration fees (€10 per class)  • Access to childcare service voucher s (chèque -service acceuil - CSA), which allow free or reduced rates in crèches  and  drop -in centres (maison relais) , depending on the income of th e household the child lives in  • Free legal assistance , including the right to be assisted by a lawyer  • Free 'Culture for All passport'  allowing  free  access to partner museums and admission to shows and events at reduced fee  • Access to s ubsidised grocery shoppin g (Epiceries sociales ) provided by social welfare offices  • Individual one -off financial assistance by social welfare offices  • Rent subsidy intended to help low -income families to rent decent accommodation, based on household income and composition  Social inclusion income fulfils the most important role in Luxembourg’s minimum income package .  The main novelty of the REVIS, introduced in 2018, is that it has a stronger activation element compared to its predecessor scheme, the RMG ( Revenu Minimum Gar anti ). Indeed, the REVIS scheme involves early screening and skills profiling to identify those recipients who are ‘job -ready’ from those who need greater activation and social support to potentially integrate into the primary labour market.  Another novelt y is that the REVIS is made up of a social inclusion benefit and an activation benefit. The social inclusion benefit is the guaranteed income component which varies depending on household composition. This change allowed for an increase in the child compon ent of the benefit, as well as an increase of the benefit for children in single parent families.  In summary, the REVIS scheme is stricter than the RMG scheme in terms of conditionality but more generous in terms of payments.  One of the objectives of REVIS  is to simplify governance and reduce administrative burdens, notably by strengthening networking and delineating responsibilities between the public employment service and social support services.  The REVIS is managed by the National Solidarity Fund ( Fon ds national de solidarité : FNS). The FNS works in close collaboration with:  - the public employment service ( Agence pour le developpement de l’emploi:  ADEM), charged primarily with the initial screening and skills profiling of Explorat ory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  REVIS applicants  and provide se rvices to recipients compulsorily registered as jobseekers ; - the national office for social inclusion ( Office national d’inclusion sociale : ONIS) responsible for managing the network of regional social inclusion officers assisting those REVIS recipients scr eened as needing intensive and personalised activation and social inclusion support.  While administrative governance has been simplified, there are shortcomings in relation to monitoring mechanisms. No data are collected on take -up (or non -take -up) of REVI S among those individuals and households eligible to claim it, which does not make it possible to assess the scheme’s effectiveness in terms of coverage. A hypothesis yet to be tested is whether the payback clause of the social inclusion benefit under REVI S (for recipients who inherit money or sell assets) may inhibit take -up.   Another potential issue is that while the REVIS is clearly activation -oriented, there is no efficient mechanism to monitor the labour market trajectories of REVIS recipients. For in stance, those recipients who require intensive activation and social inclusion support are not registered as jobseekers with ADEM.  These various strengths and weaknesses of the REVIS scheme are explored in further detail in the following sections.  The fo llowing sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent o f integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, a s well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and in dicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 