Summary  Malta does not have a Minimum Income scheme with this name. It has, however, two schemes, respectively known as Għajnuna Soċjali  (Social Assistance: SA) and Għajnuna għall -Dsiżimpjieg  (Unemployment Assistance: UA), which can, for practical purposes, be con sidered to fulfil the same function. Both these schemes are entrenched in the Maltese social security system and fall under the Social Security Act (Cap. 318).  They are administered centrally by the Department of Social Security and Income Support and Comp liance Division , which belongs to the Ministry of Social  Justice and Solidarity, the Family and Children's Rights.  SA is primarily payable  to heads  of households,  who  are not able to work, such as  for medical reasons, and where the relative financial means fall below the level established  by the Social Security Act. It is also payable to people separated who have  custody of children and to single or widowed parents who lack financial resources. U A is payable to people who  are registered as unemployed and who have exhausted their Unemployment Benefits which are payable under the contributory benefits scheme. Although both SA and UA are paid to the head of household, additional, though reduced, allowa nces are payable also to other members of the same household. Both SA and UA are subject to a means test.  SA and UA seek to provide the minimum amount possible for a person to be able to live, which is not the same as what a person requires to live adequat ely. In fact, both SA and UA have been often criticised by NGOs like Caritas who insist that people  who depend on them do not have enough to live decently, particularly in a context of constantly increasing living costs. SA’s adequacy has been questioned d espite the fact that beneficiaries of both SA and UA can still benefit from additional benefits, such as a Child Supplement, a Supplementary Allowance, rent allowance, and free dental care.  Children’ Allowances and a free medical service are universal righ ts in Malta and not part of a Minimum Income scheme, narrowly defined.   In Malta, up to 2015, many preferred to stay on SA rather than go to work because the difference with the statutory minimum wage was not attractive enough.1 A number of labour adequac y measures were then introduced with two main objectives a) to wean persons on SA or UA to take up gainful employment and b) to entice more females to join the workforce. This was achieved primarily through a system of tapering of SA/UA benefits and throug h a system of free childcare. The amounts spent on SA/UA have dropped dramatically since  these measures were introduced.  Through the Foundation for Social Work Services (FSWS), Malta runs a programme, named LEAP, which seeks to empower people  to take cont rol of their own lives and move out of poverty. Its success has been noted, but except for some exceptions described in Section 3, activities are mainly based on a drop -in system.  The extent to which the at -risk -of-poverty (AROP) rate and more especially t he material deprivation rate have been reduced in Malta as a result of SA and UA is not easy to measure with precision because of a  lack of disaggregated data. However, the fact that social spending on these rates has decreased following the labour activation measures, and the concomitant  reduction in the number of both SA and UA beneficiaries, are clearly visible in a comparison with  the figures provided in SILC2. In real ity, Malta’ AROP was on the increase for both men and women both before and  1 It is practically impossible to find written evidence of this. But the Director General of the Department of Social Security had this to say in a personal, written communication with the writer: ‘The actual rate of UA/SA together with the additional benefi ts, the difference between these benefits and the net National Minimum Wage, did not make it attractive for unemployed persons to seek employment.’ This fact was addressed through the Tapering of Benefits scheme which made it more attractive for persons to  seek employment.  2 A direct comparison of SILC data in SILC ilc_li02 (after social transfers) and ilc _li10 (before social transfers) clearly shows the effect of transfer payments , of which SA and UA are a major but not the only component on ARP. This com parison for the years 2011 to 2020 is presented in Table 4 below.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  after transfers (excluding pensions) between 2011 and 2020. Only a slight reduction is actually noted for males (and therefore reflected in t he figures for the total population) in 2020. What is also worrying is that the impact of social transfers on the AROP after transfers declined  (from 6.4 and 8.1 percentage points for men and women respectively in 2017 to a mere 4.1 and 4.9 percentage  poin ts in 2020). This effectively means that the effect of social transfers on the risk of poverty has diminished in Malta.  Gaps exist in the data on the specific effectiveness of SA and UA on the social fabric. Through a number of initiatives, it is hoped that this gap will be filled and that adequate research facilities and data will eventually provide policy makers with more  efficient measures  whereby the effectiveness of both schemes could be better assessed, and which would also contribute to  increasing the adequacy and reach of both SA and UA, both directly and through improvements in other social transfers.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integra tion with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the im pact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as  the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates t he groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 