Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  Table 3.  Expendit ure on Social Assistance 2013 -2020   Source: Official Communication NSO, 22 November  2021  The  above  table  illustrates  that  expenditure  on SA decreased  by over  41%  or €15m,  expenditure  on UA was  reduced  by 84%  or €19m.  The  reduction  in expenditure  on SA is due  to the huge  decrease  on social  assistance  dependency  which  may  in part  be due  to the measures  undertaken  during  a climate  of economic  growth  where  more  people  were  spurred  to join  the workforce.   What  is also  interesting  is that  during  the first  year  of the Covid -19 pandemic,  the number  of social  assistance  beneficiaries  remained  static  and  did not increase  as a result  of Covid -19 related  loss  of jobs,  as a result  of a series  of job retention  measures  implemented  in Malta  with  financial  support  from  the government.  3 Links to social services  and integrated provision of targeted social services  Malta’s state -run Foundation for Social Work Services (FSWS) incorporates a special agency, named Aġenzija Appoġġ  (AP) which functions as the national Agency for children, families and the community. AP safeguards and promotes the well -being of these persons through the development and provision of psycho -social welfare services. AP was not specifically set up to cat er for persons with minimum income, nor even persons who are at -risk -of-poverty or suffering material or severe material deprivation. But in its present form, AP provides services, all focusing on children, families and adults in vulnerable situations and/ or at risk of social exclusion. In line with Government policy AP offers services to support and work with families and/or individuals at risk of poverty and social exclusion to empower them to improve their quality of life through its social workers. It i s important to note however that these services are not outreach services but  are provided to people who drop in to seek them. (When requested to indicate action specifically aimed at MI beneficiaries for the present study, the official reply given was: ‘ clients are assessed irrespective if MI recipients or not ’. Thus,  these detailed data are not available.)  In parallel with the services provided by AP , the government run Foundation for Social Work Services (FSWS) runs a community based social services prog ramme which is  commonly known as LEAP13. This programme is specifically devoted to addressing Anti -Poverty and Social Exclusion issues in Malta and though not directly addressed at minimum income recipients supports many of them. The mission statement of L EAP is  13 It does not appear that LEAP is an acronym.  Year  Social Assistance  €’000  Unemployment Assistance  €’000  2013  36,582  22,861  2014  39,258  22,454  2015  28,454  17,901  2016  27,910  10,293  2017  26,812  6,005  2018  24,522  4,664  2019  22,410  3,886  2020  21,521  3,696  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  specifically to combat social exclusion and poverty through employment, capacity building, social integration and social mobility. Its declared aim is to reduce poverty amongst vulnerable families through employment and education.  LEAP focuses on f our specific population groups, namely: (i) children, (ii) the elderly, (iii) unemployed persons, and (iv) the working poor, with special attention to single parents, people with disabilities, ex -offenders, migrants and the working poor . It seeks to assist  people to alleviate poverty and social exclusion in the following spheres: (a) income and social benefits; (b) employment; (c) education; (d) health and environment; (e) social services; and (f) culture.  LEAP is present in six different localities, spread  across the Maltese islands, where it seeks to assist vulnerable individuals to integrate  into the labour market by creating occupational opportunities for disadvantaged groups and households which are at risk of poverty.  The programme aims to combat soci al exclusion and poverty through a number of interventions which include the development of a cluster -based network system at both regional and local levels which helps foster social cohesion and mobility in various vulnerable localities.  In order to reac h those people most vulnerable to poverty, LEAP is also responsible for the running of the Fund for European Aid to the most Deprived  programme (FEAD). LEAP uses the FEAD programme to access people in need of support.  LEAP aims to reduce poverty indirectly  through employment and education. Therefore, during the initial visit to  the household emphasis is placed on the importance of employment. LEAP’s staff emphasise  that employment leads to a better quality of life in a holistic manner. After each Home Visit  social mentors are invited to do a SWOT analysis of the family, so portraying the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats the family is experiencing, giving the mentor an outline of the family’s main issues. This is followed by an action plan for  the family.  As such, the capillary presence of LEAP seems to have resulted in a number of beneficiaries entering regular employment (see the annual reports of the FSWS , though nowhere are actual numbers of the people concerned indicated). But the main problem is that, outside the FEAD programme, LEAP runs functions as a drop -in service. The limited resources available do not allow the programme to be a fully -fledged outreach programme and therefore success is essentially limited . In respect of jobs search and training services, JobsPlus is the only agency that is linked, however indirectly, to SA/UA.  As such, specific initiatives have also been introduced by JobsPlus in order to level the playing field for the most vulnerable grou ps within the local labour market. The three main programmes are: a) the Access to Employment Scheme (A2E); b) the Bridging the Gap Scheme and c) the VASTE Programme.  The Access to Employment Scheme (A2E) , run by JobsPlus14 seeks to offer employment aid to enterprises in Malta and Gozo to promote the recruitment of those jobseekers and inactive persons who experience the most challenges. It strives towards enhancing opportunities for labour market access and providing work experience to those furthest away from gainful employment. This scheme was consolidated in October 2020 in order to include unemployed persons aged between 15 and 64 years who previously participated in previous initiatives such as the Youth Guarantee, Work  Exposure Scheme, or Traineeship Scheme. The scheme is demand  14 For additional information please consult https://jobsplus.gov.mt/schemes -jobseekers/a2e -scheme#:~:text=The%20Access%20to%20Employment%20(A2E,amongst%20jobseekers%20and%20inactive%20persons.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  driven and grants are awarded on a first -come first -served basis, subject to the annual ceilings and total budget of EUR 12 million.   The Bridging the Gap Scheme15, another JobsPlus programme,  provides support in the transition period from unemployment to employment to registered persons with disabilities and people in disadvantaged situations. The scheme allows the employer to evaluate the performance of the individual in the workplace, prior to  proper engagement. Participants receive a weekly allowance of 80% of the minimum wage while they can retain any social benefits they receive. However, if the work exposure period exceeds twenty -eight weeks, social benefits will have to be forfeited. Addit ionally, employers participating in this scheme will be exempted from social security contributions, wages and sick leave benefits until proper engagement.  Similarly,  through the VASTE Programme16 (EUR 13 million) JobsPlus offers a holistic assessment to participants as well as pre -employment training (PET) or sheltered employment training (SET) which might lead to several employment opportunities. The latter is a one -year programme aimed at preparing individuals with mental, physical and/or intellectual disabilities for employment by stimulating working environment and possible move towards sheltered employment and eventually to open employment. Additionally, through the VASTE Programme, persons with disabilities and vulnerable jobseekers can  also benefit from occupational therapy, professional support, job carving, job coaching and mentoring.  Despite these programmes, which are very useful to reduce dependence on SA and AU, the link between JobsPlus and the Department of Social Services, whic h administers both SA and UA, is very tenuous because it  consists simply in feeding the DSS with the list of names of those who qualify for benefits. Training provided by JobsPlus is not organised jointly with the DSS, nor does the DSS provide any other services except ensuring that the benefits reach those to whom they are addressed.  4 