Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  Malta does not have a Minimum Income Scheme that is specifically known by this name, but it has two separate schemes, closely linked with eac h other, that practically serve for the same purpose. These are:   Social Assistance (SA) ( Għajnuna Soċjali ); and   Unemployment Assistance (UA) ( Għajnuna għal -Diżimpjieg ) Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  In law3, a key concept in the provision of SA in Malta is that of ‘head of household’. A head of household is the person who is considered to be the ‘senior’ member4 of a group of persons living together as a family by the Director of Social Security, even if that family is composed of only one person, as long as the household is an indepen dent unit. In respect of ‘sickness benefits’ the Act provides for two exceptions when ‘two  households can exist under the same roof.  SA: Social  assistance  is payable  to heads  of households,  who  are unfit  for work for medical reasons, and where the relative financial means fall below the level established  by the Social Security Act. SA is also payable to people who are separated and have  custody of children and to single or widowed parents who lack financial resources. SA is subject to a means test. There is no choice of which assistance to claim as SA is paid to people who are unfit for work  for medical reasons while UA is paid to those registered as  unemployed with Jobsplus  UA: Unemployment Assistance is payable when a person is no longer eligible f or unemployment benefit  (UB, which is linked to weekly social security contributions). UB is considered a short -term benefit (lasting for 156 days as a maximum), but someone unemployed may qualify for longer -term benefits under UA. In cases where the benef iciary is not entitled to UB, they are paid the UA in full. UA is therefore received by someone unemployed not qualifying for UB, subject to passing a capital  resources test and an income test. The claimant must be registered for  work under the Part 1 of the Unemployment Register.  It is worth noting that, while benefitting from Unemployment Benefit, a person can also benefit from the Special Unemployment Benefit if that person satisfies the relative Unemployment Assistance means tests.   1.1  Eligibility  SA Elig ibility : To be eligible for benefit a person must be the head of a household who is legally resident in Malta and be able to satisfy  means test  on the income and assets of  the household. The applicant must not be in employment and cannot  register  for work  under  Part  1 of  the Unemployment  Register. If a person decides to register with JobsPlus in search of a job (something which they can  decide to do), SA is replaced by UA.   3In section 2 (1), of the Social Security Act, CAP. 318 the precise definitions of the term head of household is given as follows:  "head of household" in relation to a household consisting o f two or more persons means such person as is in the opinion of the Director the head of household;  "household" means one person who in the opinion of the Director is living alone or two or more persons who in the opinion of the Director are living togeth er as a family:  Provided that –  (a) for the purposes of Sickness Assistance claimed in respect of a person who is over the age of sixty years, together with his wife or husband, if any, as the case may be, and children and none of whom is in insurable employment or self -occupied; and  (b) for the purposes of Sickness Assistance in respect of chronic schizophrenia in respect of any member of the household who is not the head of household or his wife, if any,  such persons or such couples shall, if it is to their advantage, be considered as  forming a household of their own:  Provided further that for the purposes of a Free Medical Aid awarded under this Act, the Director may, if he feels that the circumstances of the household so require, exclude from the composition of the household any per son or persons who would otherwise form part of it.  Accessed at https://deputyprimeminister.gov.mt/en/pharmaceutical/Documents/cap_318.pdf  4 In the case of couples, at the application stage they can freely decide who is to be considered as the head of household for assistance purposes.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  In cases of substance abuse or other addictions, the person needs also to attend a rehabilitation programme in order to receive another type of benefit, known as the ‘Drug Addict Assistance'.  The medical condition of persons who are incapable for work is reviewed periodically.  Failure to comply with these conditions may result in the total  loss of the benefits.  For the purpose of the means test, income is defined in gross terms i.e. before deducting tax. The duration of SA is unlimited as long as the stipulated conditions are satisfied. The situation is reviewed once a year to verify that t he correct rate of benefit is being granted. The amount of assistance is not reduced if children are in employment. The number of previous payments of the same benefit does not affect the duration of the payment and any intervals in between reviews.  The  applicant  must  satisfy  the capital  means  test as follows:  for a couple  it must  not exceed  €23,300  and €14,000 for a single person. Any income deriving from rents; bank interests, income from capital, stocks  and shares; alimony and any other income derived m ust not exceed the  maximum  Social  Assistance rate per household. When calculating the income of people receiving child maintenance (generally in cases of separation or divorce as a result of court decisions) only a small percentage (equivalent to 0.157%) o f the child maintenance received is included as income for the purpose of this test . These thresholds were established many years ago, the precise date is unknown. The capital means test was reviewed last in 2003. These decisions are political decisions ta ken by the Cabinet of Ministers at national level and are not officially linked to any specific mechanism or criteria.  The following properties are excluded from the Capital Resources Test:   the house of residence;   the first private car;   a garage for privat e use;   a summer residence.  The market value of immovable property, which is being put to profitable use, as for example property which is rented to third parties, is not subject to the capital test; only the rental income from it is considered.  The total market value of any moveable assets is taken into account, except as indicated above.  As from 2022 any inheritance with a value of €14K to 30K in respect of individuals and €23K to 50K in respect of a couple will also not be taken into consideration.  Claimants are not obliged to sell their belongings but if their total means exceed the prescribed threshold, benefit is not payable.  Apart from satisfying the Capital Resources Test, a Weekly Means Test is also carried out. The derived income of all the h ousehold is added together and the resulting balance is divided by 52 (weeks) and deducted from the maximum weekly applicable rate. If the derived income is 0, the maximum rate is paid, if the income is more, only the difference between the actual income a nd the maximum rate is paid. If the income exceeds the maximum rate, there is no entitlement to the benefit.  The  awarded  benefit  is equal  to the difference  between  the applicable  social  assistance  rate  (which in turn depends on  the household  composition) and  assessed  income. SA is paid up to the age of 60 years, at which point a non -contributory Age Pension is awarded.  However, if a person receiving SA starts working, the benefits are tapered and not completely stopped immediately, but are con tinued to be paid in a tapered manner: 65% of the rate for the first year, 45% of the rate for the second year and 25% of the Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  rate for the third year. The employer is also paid 25% of the rate for the period of 3 years.  The officials in the Department of S ocial Security  take into consideration available data  (EU-SILC, the Labour Force Survey ) and independent studies, such as those undertaken by Caritas Malta (Caritas 2011, 2016 and 2020) , when they make recommendations for changes in the benefit system. However,  beneficiaries, and at times NGOs, often claim that entitlements need to be further  improved . Caritas Malta  propose s as many as 25 very specific recommendations to this effect : of these 21 are ‘policy recommendations’, whilst the remaining 4 are ‘research recommendations ’.5 UA eligibility  is identical to SA: the Means test is equally ap plicable. However, if a person receiving UA for at least one year, starts working, the benefits are tapered and not completely stopped immediately, but are continued  to be paid in a tapered manner: 65% of the rate for the first year, 45% of the rate for th e second year and 25% of the rate for the third year. The employer is also paid 25% of the rate for the period of 3 years.  Like SA, UA is indirectly linked to  EU-SILC, the Labour Force Survey and independent studies such as those undertaken by Caritas Malt a. The same concerns referred to in respect of SA apply to UA.  UA is payable up to the date a person is registered as unemployed but not over the age of 60 when a non -contributory Age Pension becomes  payable. The house of residence is not taken into consid eration.  1.2  Coverage  The Methodology for setting the level of benefit is not systemic, in the sense that it is not based on a system -embedded framework that is uniformly used to identify gaps and update benefits. Classification of Functions of Government ( COFOG) and the European System of integrated Social Protection Statistics ( ESSPROS) data are very important tools as is the annual EU -SILC database. Officials in the Department of Social Security use these as the basis for their recommendations for changes  in the benefit system.  It is to be noted that since 2014 Making Work Pay Policies were introduced and the system modified to implement these policies.  Despite this lack of a system -based framework, a number of indirect sources are used to inform policy m akers to make recommendations for change in benefit levels, which are normally introduced on the occasion of the annual Budget. Among these one finds the following sources/initiatives that are important for policy development and change. These are listed h ere but more information is provided in section 3 below:   The regular revisions of Malta’s anti -poverty strategy;   Occasional research papers on different social p olicy issues published by the Central Bank of Malta;   Malta’s participation in the Tax -benefit m icrosimulation model for the European Union (EUROMOD )6;  5 The three studies respectively published by Caritas in 2011, 2016 and 2020 are known to have effectively influences improvements, despite the fact that there is no specific and official link or obligation on the part of government to follow up their conclu sions or recommendations. These recommendations are summarized in the 2020 Executive Summary of the Caritas study, available at https://www.caritasmalta.org/wp -conten t/uploads/2021/02/Caritas -MEBDL.pdf , p. 10 et seq.  6 The Economic Policy Department has partnered the EUROMOD project since its early days. EUROMOD is a tax-benefit microsimulation model maintained by Joint Research Centre (JRC) for the European Union that  enables researchers and policy analysts to calculate, in a comparable manner, the effects of taxes and benefits on household incomes and work incentives for the population of each country and for the EU as a whole. EUROMOD is used for internal technical a ssessments. Among other things, EUROMOD provides the estimation of the redistributive effects of actual, previous or future tax -benefit policies; policy swapping analysis; estimating budgetary effects of policy changes; tax -benefit design; estimation  of wo rk incentives and labour supply effects of policies and stress tests of a tax -benefit system. EUROMOD’s specially designed purpose tools and extensions, and especially the Hypothetical Household Tool (HHoT) (the plugin for Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6   Actions envisaged as part of Malta’s Recovery and Resilience Plan; and   The request to the World Bank to provide technical assistance towards the rebalancing of the Social Safety Net programmes  Disagg regated data in terms of the different poverty levels ( those at risk of poverty, those at risk of severe poverty, and data by income deciles)  on take -up is not available for Malta, but through the capillary system of the Department of Social Security (DSS)  and its network of area offices spread all over Malta, persons who are entitled have very easy access to advice and guidance on how to access benefits.  Access has also been greatly facilitated since the introduction of servizz.gov  system . Servizz.gov  is the agency that brings all government services together and acts as a bridge between the Public Service of Malta and the general public, making government services more accessible. Servizz.gov  can be accessed through a freephone. It provides  instant responses on any area of the public service. Follow -up is provided by public officials from servizz.gov  when further investigation of individual cases is required. Given the knowledge Maltese people have of the benefits available, and the easy acc ess to them, it can be assumed that uptake is universal. (I.e all or nearly all people who qualify benefits claim them). Senior social security officials state that in their experience, beneficiaries in Malta at times know the rules and regulations coverin g benefits as much, if not more, than the staff responsible for their administration.  1.3  Adequacy  According to the Social Security Act ( Att dwar is -Sigurta' Soċjali ) (Cap. 318), the minimum level of income in the form of SA is calculated as the difference bet ween the weekly household income (total income for both adults and children accruing, for example, from investments, bank interests or rents) and the maximum rate payable, which is €109.43 per week in 2021 for the first adult and a further €8.15 per week f or each additional and eligible member of the household. The benefit entitlement is effectively equivalent to 60% of the national minimum wage. The benefit varies according to the means of the household and the number of adults and dependent children in th e household. The following examples of the maximum amounts payable illustrate this:   Couple with 2 children: €133.88 per week   Single person with no dependants: €109.43 per week  In addition, both SA and UA beneficiaries receive a Government Bonus of €135.1 0 in June and December. This bonus is also paid to all those employed in Malta. An additional bonus of €3.12 per week is also granted. Both these bonuses constitute fixed amounts paid to a household, irrespective of the composition of the household.   designing hypothetical households  and generating data according to the chosen household characteristics, and the estimation of the effects of taxes and benefits on household disposable income), and the Policy Effects Tool (PET) (through which one can estimates the first -order effects of p olicies on household incomes) are very useful. The results from the use of these specialised models are not published.  Malta’s EUROMOD Country Reports covering tax -benefit systems since 2007 constitute a very useful source for evaluative exercise conducted  on the effects of social spending, among others6.  The results derived from EUROMOD are published on a regular basis  in the Annual Country Report and the National Reform Programme (NRP). The NRP includes the distributional impact of various policy reform announced in the latest budget. The latest published NRP which includes a section on EUROMOD is that of 2020, however, we are currently working on the 2022 NRP which will be published in April. EUROMOD was also used to analyse the impact of the wage supple ment scheme, on household disposable income in 2020, and the results were published in the Draft Budgetary Plan of 2021.   Further details can be found at https://euromod -web.jrc.ec.europa.eu/   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  As from 2022, the weekly allowance for the first adult has been revised up to €111.18 [€109.43 + 1.75=€111.18]. The €1.75 corresponds to the cost -of-living  adjustment (COLA) given for 2022.  No other assets than those listed above are excluded from the mean s-test.  In calculating the means of applicants for social security, income is defined in gross terms i.e. before deducting tax and social security. It is calculated on the basis of the last average weekly income. As already explained at the beginning of th is report, in terms of the Act, a] ‘household’ is defined as one person living alone or two or more people living together as a family. Administratively, the head is normally considered to be the oldest member  of the household.  All SA and UA beneficiaries are also entitled either to the Supplementary Allowance or to the Children’s Allowance and also to the Energy Benefit. In some cases, other specific benefits (such as a ‘rent benefit’) are payable.  The duration of the benefit is unlimited as long as the st ipulated conditions are satisfied. The situation is reviewed once a year to verify that the correct rate of benefit is being granted. The amount of assistance is not reduced over time. The number of previous payments of the same benefit does not affect the  duration of the payment and any intervals in between reviews.  These benefits are adjusted annually by Government through the annual budget and are linked to the minimum wage. Up to 2021, these have been regularly increased annually by two -thirds of the fu ll Cost of Living Increase, worked out on a mechanism agreed with the social partners and known as COLA. As from 2022, the full Cost of Living Increase will be given, rather than two -thirds of the calculated rate.  A strong point of this system is that elig ibility is fixed and available to all those who qualify. Indexation according to COLA is also a form of insurance that the value of the benefits does not decrease with inflation.  A negative  aspect of the system is that it is often claimed by beneficiaries and some NGOs that these benefits are not adequate. The three Caritas studies on minimum budgets for a decent living (20117, 2016 and 2020), referred to above, systematically included a number of recommendations and the main thrust of these studies has be en implemented. It is also important to note that the COLA mechanism, even if fair, has an in -built lag of one year and therefore does not really reflect the ‘current’ cost of living. Through various means, the government is currently undertaking studies t o ensure that welfare safety net is truly adequate. What is true for SA applies for UA as the rates are identical.  1.4  Links with other benefits  Special circumstances that entitle the general population for special benefits, such as the special ‘birth bonus’ a warded to a mother on giving birth, are also available to SA beneficiaries if they are entitled on the same basis, as members of the rest of the population are.  The following additional benefits also apply:  1. in cases where a SA beneficiary is living in a re nted property, a Rent Allowance of €1.16 per week is added to the Social Assistance applicable rate. The Rent allowance is at a fixed rate of €1.16 per week and not linked to the actual rent being paid by beneficiaries ;  2. In Malta, tertiary level students a ttending the University (UM), the Malta College of Arts, Science & Technology (MCAST) or the Institute for Tourism Studies (ITS) are awarded a state stipend. SA/UA beneficiaries who are over 23  7 The full references to these studies is provided in the References section of this report. The 2011 study is not available on line and does not feature in the Reference section.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  years of age and who enter University or MCAST continue to rec eive the same assistance as long as their stipend and any other ancillary benefits received do not exceed the difference between the SA and the National Minimum Wage. In cases where their total income (i.e. stipends plus SA/UB and any other benefits) excee ds the National Minimum Wage, only the amount exceeding the National Minimum Wage is  deducted from the SA/UA. In this way, their maximum income (i.e. made up of the total of stipends, any other ancillary benefits and SA/UA) would be equivalent to the Natio nal Minimum Wage;  3. Children’s Allowance (€24.08 per week per child) is also payable to UA/SA beneficiaries if children are still under the age of 16 and are still living in the same household;  4. Supplementary Allowance are also payable to those who are not in receipt of Children’s Allowance. As already indicated above, all households in receipt of SA/UA also benefit from the Energy Benefit scheme.  5. In addition to these financial benefits, some elements of medical assistance, which are not provided under t he National Health Service, are also available to the beneficiaries if required. These include: free dental treatment, free spectacles and free hearing aids.  2 