Governance mechanisms  Given the size of Malta, MI schemes are run completely by the central government, through the Department of Social Security and the Income Support and Co mpliance Division within the Ministry of Social Justice and Solidarity, the Family and Children's Rights . The central operations are supported by the servizz.gov  hubs, which serve as contact points for people who require clarification, or any form of servi ce from the department.  As already pointed out above, the service is also supported by the one -stop service provided by servizz.gov , which is a telephone -based and internet -based service through which information and assistance can be provided for all the different sections of the public service in Malta17. The massive spread of digital services ( e -government) has greatly facilitated access to people through the Internet. Beneficiaries who are not able to use the internet can call personally at any of the hubs.   15 For additional information please consult: https://jobsplus.gov .mt/schemes -jobseekers/bridge -gap -scheme  16 For further information consult: https://jobsplus.gov.mt/schemes -jobseekers/vaste  17 The official description of serivzz.gov agency is: ‘ servizz.gov  is the agency bringing all government services together. It is a  bridge between the Public Service of Malta and the general public, making government services more accessible.  servizz.gov makes life easier and saves time. It does away with travelling to offices in Valletta and elsewhere.  The first three hubs opened in Paola, Birkirkara and Qawra. Another two followed, in Vittoriosa and Qormi. In 2019 the service expanded in a different direction, with the opening of three centres related to a particular sector. They are the education hub in Belt is -Sebħ, the family hub in Floriana (situated in the old ADT building) and the taxation hub in Floriana.  In 2020, servizz.gov tripled in number and is now managing 23 hubs across Malta ’. For more detailed information on the servizz.gov Agency, please consult: https://www.servizz .gov.mt/en/Pages/Servizz/default.aspx  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  A self -sufficient independent and regular monitoring of the scheme outside the COLA mechanism does not exist in Malta, but a number of auditing and monitoring exercises are in place. Some of these are part of general auditing procedures undertaken bo th internally by the Department of Social Security and by the National Audit Office, others are the result of publications by bodies which are not directly involved in running MI schemes, whilst others form part of wider initiatives that cover social spend ing in general. Among these, the following are relevant:   Malta’s Anti -poverty strategy : In 2014 -2015 Malta undertook studies that led to the development of an anti -poverty strategy18. This was followed by two evaluation reports covering the period 2014 -201 9. The first of these reports covered the 2014 -2016 period19, whilst the second one, conducted in 2020, covered the period 2017 - 201920.   Occasional research papers by the Central Bank  (which is not the institution responsible for MI schemes) address social issues. Two recent publications that impact on MI are:   ‘The Inflation Experience of Low Income Households’ by Jude Darmanin (2021)21;  ‘The characteristics associated with the short and long -term unemployed in the Maltese labour market’, by Ian Borg and Rafael Fearne (August 2021)22;  Action as part of Malta’s Recovery and Resilience Plan (RRP), which has only been very recently approved by the EU Commission. Reform C5-R5: Reinforcing the resilience of the labour market will specifically address the MI structure in Malta. The RRP does not specifically mention either SA or UB, but a revision of unemployment benefits would be incomplete if UA is not included in the study.   Malta’s continue d participation in EUROMOD  assists policy makers to assess MI regimes. In particular, EUROMOD’s specially designed purpose tools and extensions, and especially the Hypothetical Household Tool (HHoT) (the  plugin for designing hypothetical households and gen erating data according to the chosen household characteristics, and the estimation of the effects of taxes and benefits on household disposable income), and the Policy Effects Tool (PET) (through which the first -order effects of policies on household incom es) are very useful in this respect . The model includes other tools that are used in the analysis such as the Labour Market Adjustment (LMA) Add -on and Marginal Tax Rate (MTR) add -on. The LMA allows the transition of individuals to a different labour marke t status such as unemployment/ employment and then we can analyse how this change is linked with the defined tax and benefit model and analyse the distributional impact on household disposable income. The MTR analyse how an increase of 3% on employment inc ome equivalent to working an additional hour impact employee’s disposable income, through changes in social insurance contribution, paid taxes and benefit entitlement. This indicator is a proxy of the intensive margin for labour supply.   18 Available at: https://family.gov.mt/wp -content/uploads/2021/05/Poverty -Strategy -14-MT.pdf  19Available at: https://family.gov.mt/wp -content/uploads/2021/05/Implementation -and -Evaluation -Report -2014 -2016.pdf  20 Available at: https://family.gov.mt/wp -content/uploads/2021/05/NSP -Web.pdf  21 Available at: https://www.centralbankmalta.org/site/Publications/Economic%20Research/2021/policy -note -inflation -experience -low -income -households.pdf?revcount=4304  22 Available at: https://www.centralbankmalta.org/site/Reports -Articles/2021/policy -note -unemployment -duration.pdf?revcount=1496 . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strength s and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  15   Malta’s request for external support through the World Bank to rebalance the Social Safety Net23: Component 1 of this project (Stocktaking and Policy Level Analysis), which is currently underway, involves three main tasks: (1) inventory and mapping of existing soc ial protection interventions (including social assistance, tax benefits, and pensions), focusing on implications for the policy of safety nets. MI schemes are a core element of Malta’ social safety net ; 2) exploration and development of potential reform op tions to increase progressivity of social assistance (safety nets), including potential expansion of the tax benefits; and (3) recommendations and reform roadmap.   The Guardian of Future Generations, established by Article 8 of the  Sustainable Development A ct, Chap. 52124. One of the main objectives of this new institutions established by the Act is to ‘promote sustainable development advocacy across national policy making, legislation and practices’ to ensure that any decisions taken by government includes an evaluation of how future generations would likely be impacted by them. Minimum Income schemes are therefore not directly listed, but once more they constitute an important aspect which would need to be constantly monitored in view of the future conseque nces of any decisions taken in their respect.  5 