Summary  The social insertion income ( rendimento social de inserção  – RSI)  is aimed at individuals and families living in severe economic distress and in a potential or actual state of social exclusion . Is based on three basic pillars: i) distribution of resources; ii) management of social risks; and iii) promotion of social inclusion. The S ocial Security Institute ( Instituto da Segurança Social ) is the entity responsible for regulating and financing the scheme at the national level. Implementation is handled at the local level. The scheme’s local units are made up of local representatives of  different bodies. As from April 2022  (Decree -Law no. 23/2022, February 14) , the co -ordination of the units became the responsibility of municipalities. Until then  it was the responsibility of local services of social security.  In order to tackle the econo mic and financial crisis that began in 2007 -2008,  a set of measures were implemented to sustainably contain the increase in public expenditure  (especially in the first half of the 2010s). Among them, the redefinition of the conditions of access to social s upport was an integral part , –– leading to changes in the RSI scheme (e.g. in terms of eligibility rules). In 2021, the RSI had 261,992 beneficiaries,  which represented only slightly more than half of the peak number of beneficiaries in March 2010. Existin g studies (e.g. Rodrigues, 2011; GEP -MTSSS, 2021)  emphasise the decreased effectiveness of the scheme regarding the mitigation of the intensity and severity of poverty, with only marginal gains in terms of the vertical efficiency of the programme and pover ty-reduction efficiency.   Despite this, the RSI is widely recognised as an important measure for mitigating the intensity and severity of poverty. However, the measure falls short in terms of the reduction of poverty. In fact the mean RSI amounts, even if  they have been increased since the beginning of 2016, remain far below the poverty threshold.  . The assignment of the RSI implies a social integration contract  that includes: a cash benefit and the signature of an insertion programme including a set of rights and duties that the claimant must sign up to in order to be entitled to receive the benefit. The contract implies that all beneficiaries meeting the conditions fo r activation are registered with the public employment services and available for a set of integration measures.  There are not many evaluation studies on the RSI and its evolution over time. However, a recent study (GEP -MTSSS, 2021) reported that professio nals involved in the scheme’s implementation, as well as academics, consider that there are obstacles within the scheme that make it more difficult for beneficiaries to leave it. The main obstacles identified are the insufficient co -ordination between serv ices/partners, and the bureaucracy and rigidity of insertion programmes, which are considered inadequate for certain types of beneficiaries. They also consider institutional efforts to be insufficient as regards investment in integration and meeting benefi ciaries’ needs for income support and help in finding employment.  The insertion contract under the scheme is intended to involve an individual and family multidimensional diagnosis, as well as the formulation of an individual plan, the identification of p riority actions, and mobilisation of resources. It also entails monitoring and assessment and the involvement of different stakeholders (e.g. public employment services, schools, and health authorities) to produce the assessment.  Although different stakeh olders in the local units are expected to co -operate to provide the support needed, there are no single points of contact or one -stop shops to facilitate this. However, based on the diagnosis made, beneficiaries may be directed to targeted social services.  Additionally, it should be mentioned that beneficiaries are allocated a case manager  who is responsible for preparing, implementing and monitoring the personal social integration programmes, in line with the needs and resources identified . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  Finally, the ma in conclusions of the aforementioned study on the evolution of the RSI over 20 years of implementation should be mentioned. These are that: i) the RSI is a key measure within the scope of social policy; ii) the amount of the benefit is too low, and the inv estment in social inclusion is insufficient; iii) the scheme tackles the severity of poverty but struggles to promote the autonomy of the beneficiaries; iv) access to employment is an aspiration of most beneficiaries but they feel discrimination and stigma tisation to be obstacles; and v) monitoring and evaluation have been insufficient, too dependent on political cycles, and need a comprehensive approach that integrates the different social dimensions involved. Thus, deepening knowledge of the scheme throug h monitoring, evaluation, and research is crucial.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the  links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governanc e mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusio n and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it pro vides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.   1 