Governance mechanisms  The Social Security Institute is the entity responsible for regu lating and financing the scheme at the national level. The Social Security Institute is made up of regional -level departments. However, only the autonomous regions of Azores and Madeira, where there are regional equivalents of the Social Security Institute , have responsibilities for regulation and implementation at the regional level. This is not the case in mainland Portugal where regions do not have this kind autonomy.  Services are delivered at the municipal level. The approval of Decree 65/2021 in March 2021 reinforced this approach by assigning to municipalities the co -ordination of the local units . This change takes place between April 2022 and  January 2023 . Until April 2022 it was a responsibility of local social security services . The local insertion units are made up of local representatives of public bodies for social security, employment and vocational training, education and health, and local authorities.  Representatives of public/private bodies of non -profit organisations that operate in  the local areas in question may also be invited to participate.  The local insertion units’ responsibilities include approving the insertion agreement, organising its implementation, and monitoring and evaluation.  In some cases, delivery of the scheme is o utsourced to private social solidarity agencies, which become responsible for managing a given set of cases in particular areas – the so -called protocol teams. This mechanism was instigated in 2003 and was further reinforced and redesigned after 2005. The objective of the outsourcing was to improve the effectiveness of the contractual process between the beneficiary and the authorities, by overcoming the lack or insufficiency of human resources and ensuring that the processes are individualised, closely int eractive, and monitored.  Monitoring takes place at the local level through local insertion units, which have the task of monitoring the continued eligibility of RSI recipients, according to a defined set of risk indicators, and establishing sanctions for t hose failing to comply with the rules.  Two organisational changes have had a severe impact on the monitoring data available: the closure of the National Commission for Social Insertion Income in 2011, whose main task was to evaluate the implementation of t he measure; and, in 2012, the closure of the unit for studies and planning of the Social Security Institute. Both regularly produced monitoring and evaluation reports on the implementation of the RSI – both on the income component and on the insertion acti vities – which are no longer available. The statistical information publicly available is now restricted to the number of beneficiaries (individuals and households) and to the average amounts of the benefit.  The issue of monitoring is complex and a recent study has highlighted that this is rather unclear, even for stakeholders directly involved in the scheme: " as regards monitoring, we could detect two opposite perspectives, one according to which the RSI is one of the measures with the most complete and de bated monitoring and a second arguing that monitoring is still to be put in place " (GEP -MTSSS, 2021: 123).  No indication is available as to what key indicators of benefit and service delivery/performance are monitored, by whom and with what frequency.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  The re is no regular evaluation of the RSI, and there are few evaluations or studies of it and its evolution over time. Those that do exist tend not to be recent.  One recent study emphasised as one of its main conclusions that " the RSI is understood as a key m easure within the scope of social policy but deepening knowledge (through monitoring, evaluation and research) is crucial for improving its effectiveness and efficiency " (GEP -MTSSS, 2021: 127). Furthermore, it stressed that "monitoring and evaluation have been insufficient, too dependent on political cycles and needing a comprehensive approach that integrates the different social dimensions involved in a complex programme such as the RSI " (GEP -MTSSS, 2021: 127). It also highlighted criticism regarding the g ap resulting from the abolition of the RSI national commission, as " despite its insufficiencies, it made it possible to overcome the absence of a comprehensive vision of results and the insufficiencies in terms of programme implementation ”. There seem to b e no mechanisms in place to ensure that recommendations for improving all or part of the RSI regime are taken into account and implemented.  There are fraud -monitoring procedures carried out by the Social Security Institute. However, neither details on thes e procedures nor systematic information regarding fraud cases appear to be available. The scarcity of information available is echoed by the media. A recent example concerns the autonomous region of the Azores. According to the media, 139 out of the 195 ca ses inspected between late October 2020 and early August 2021 had irregularities, but not all cases led to the suspension of benefit.  5 