Links with labour market activation  Bes ides the income component, the RSI includes an insertion contract with a set of rights and duties that claimants must sign in order to be entitled to receive the benefit. The insertion contract needs to be signed within a period of 45 days from the date th e application was approved. The contract implies that all beneficiaries meeting the conditions for activation are registered with the public employment service (PES) and available for a set of integration measures. According to Article 18 of Law 123/2012, they include: i) accepting work or vocational training; ii) attending education/apprenticeship programmes; iii) participating in temporary vocational programmes that may help their integration into the labour market, meet social objectives or respond to so cial needs; iv) participating in vocational guidance and training programmes; v) participating in professional rehabilitation measures; vi) participating in measures aimed at prevention, treatment and rehabilitation in respect of drug addiction; vii) parti cipating in activities of charities; viii) using social support facilities; ix) domestic support services; and x) incentives for setting up as self -employed.  Whenever the insertion contract includes employment integration in collaboration with the PES, it is mandatory for recipients to engage in a personal employment plan, for which the Institute for Employment and Vocation Training ( Instituto de Emprego e Formação Profissional  – IEFP) is responsible.  Exceptions as regards this link with labour market acti vation apply to people who are already working11, people who present a medical certificate attesting that they do not meet the conditions for work, and informal primary care -givers recognised by the competent social security services.  It is not possible t o easily obtain statistical data on the proportion of recipients subject to activation requirements. However, it is possible to identify the numbers of RSI beneficiaries aged 18 -64, which were: 147,427 in 2021 (56,3% of the total of RSI  10 https://tarifasocial.dgeg.gov.pt/estatistica.aspx  11 The RSI may be cumulated with income from work. However, eligibility criteria should continue to be met. In practice, this means that the vast majori ty if RSI recipients who start to work will lose entitlement to the benefit.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  beneficiaries); 167, 727 (i.e. 65% of the total of RSI beneficiaries) in 2020; 175,507 (65.6%) in 2019; and 187,478 (66.4%) in 2018.  If the insertion contract is not signed, the RSI request is rejected and cannot be submitted again within the next 24 months. If a household mem ber does not sign the contract, they cannot benefit from the RSI for the next 24 months (i.e. they are no longer considered a member of the household for the purposes of calculating the amount of the benefit), but their income continues to be taken into ac count in the calculation of household income. The same applies if a household member fails to attend meetings (without justification) or refuses a socially useful job. Furthermore, failure to deliver the necessary documents leads to RSI rejection or suspen sion.  There are protocols between the Social Security Institute and certain public services (e.g. employment – IEFP). According to these protocols, the SSI is supposed to work in co -operation with the PES , and data need to be exchanged between the two enti ties at the municipal level. The local social services should be informed, for instance, whenever RSI beneficiaries fail to comply with an activation procedure. In such cases they are again denied receipt of the RSI for the next 24 months.  In most cases, it is not possible to distinguish RSI recipients from other categories of unemployed people in data on participants in active labour market programmes (ALMPs). The exception is the employment -insertion contract (CEI) measure. There is a specific str and for RSI recipients designated as employment -insertion contract + (CEI+).  The CEI+ is targeted at RSI beneficiaries who are unemployed. The aim is for them to work to help meet the temporary needs of public/private non -profit companies for a maximum per iod of 12 months. When RSI beneficiaries start working via the CEI+, they are entitled to a monthly allocation  of 100% of the IAS  (€443.20 in 2022) , which replaces the RSI. In addition, the ‘measure to support the emergency reinforcement of social and heal th equipment’ (MAREESS) has been created recently to increase the capacity of public institutions and the solidarity sector to provide social and health care in response to the COVID -19 pandemic, and an extraordinary scheme has been introduced to increase monthly grants for CEI and CEI+ in projects carried out in these areas.  If RSI recipients engage in training or in the CEI+ programme, the benefit is replaced by the associated ALMP allowance. There are no data on how many RSI recipients continue to receiv e tapering support and what their characteristics are.  A recent study has highlighted the fact that some beneficiaries consider that integration measures meet the needs of their household, while others criticise the training component in particular. The fa ct that training often takes place away from the place of residence (leading to travel and scheduling difficulties especially for those with young children), and the mismatch between jobs, the training available and the qualifications of beneficiaries, are  mentioned as issues. “ The existence of an insertion programme negotiated with the beneficiaries is positive but has obstacles to its full implementation, (...) The main internal obstacles hampering the beneficiaries' autonomy are the insufficient co -ordin ation between services/partners, bureaucracy and the rigidity of insertion programmes, which is not adequate for certain types of beneficiaries. (...) Institutional efforts are insufficient as regards investment in integration and solving the beneficiaries ' need in economic terms and regarding employment. These are major obstacles to their full socio -economic inclusion ” (GEP -MTSSS, 2021: 129).  3 