Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  As mentioned above, all beneficiaries  need to sign and abide by the insertion agreement. This is expected to involve an individual and family multidimensional Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  diagnosis, as well as the construction of the life project, identification of priority actions, resource mobilisation, monitoring and assessment. If recipients do not sign the agreement, the benefit is suspended, and they will not be able to request it again for 24 months.  Thus, a multidimensional needs assessment (leading to the insertion contract) needs to be carried out for all RSI re cipients. As from April 2022  (Decree -Law no. 23/202 2, February 14 ), the co -ordination of the process became the responsibility of municipalities. Until then  it was the responsibility of the Social Security Institute. Assessments differ according to differe nt groups (e.g. children and adults; those fit for work and those not). As such, different stakeholders need to be involved in preparing the assessment (e.g. public employment services, schools, and health authorities).  The contract covers areas such as ed ucation, employment, health, training, housing, and social action. However, since 2012, the RSI has no longer included allowances to cover the costs of (for example) transport, education, healthcare or any specific circumstances such as disability.  Such al lowances can only be awarded under other resource -constrained or social assistance benefits. Allowances to cover the costs of meals, transport and/or school can be awarded to RSI beneficiaries. However, they come as part of particular measures that are inc luded in other schemes, such as CEI+, and not as part of the RSI scheme per se. Beneficiaries can receive counselling in specific areas – health, housing and other areas such as food and personal hygiene. In these cases, the teams act as intermediaries/fac ilitators between beneficiaries and the health and housing services. Helping with documentation and accompanying beneficiaries on specific occasions are examples of services that can be provided. Services can also refer beneficiaries to bodies that provide  specific services in each of these areas.  Personal targeted social services in Portugal are provided principally by state -supported private organisations. The methods used for targeting depend on the individual/household assessment. Services provided incl ude: debt counselling, advocacy and mediation; residential care and activities; social work and activities; shelters and accommodation for people experiencing social exclusion, such as the homeless; people with addiction problems, and ex -offenders; domesti c violence intervention and prevention; family coaching and mentoring; and day centres. These are available to RSI recipients. Unfortunately, no data are available on expenditure, intensity of use, (dis)incentives, take -up, and so on.  There are no single p oints of contact or one -stop shops providing RSI recipients with the necessary benefits, services and activation. However, there are national -level protocols – for example, between the SSI and the IEFP, and co -operation between these is specifically mentio ned in the legislation for specific measures. There are no sequential services as such. To avoid dropping -out, the insertion agreement is monitored with the beneficiaries and local stakeholders.  Local insertion units are the bodies with the responsibility for assessing the insertion agreements inter -institutionally and for ensuring that they are carried out effectively. The units prepare (updated) social information on households’ situation (e.g. their income, and changes to insertion agreements), as well a s the social report to be sent to the social security services for consideration and rejection or deferral of the provision.  Assembling all relevant stakeholders in local insertion units is undoubtedly a strength of the system. The aim is that they establi sh a partnership between services to first of all provide beneficiaries with a sound diagnosis, followed by tailor -made plans, as well as facilitating their access to comprehensive and integrated support.  The evaluation report by the GEP -MTSSS highlighted positive features of the units. It emphasised that by promoting teamwork between professionals from different bodies Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  and services, and from different backgrounds, synergies are obtained and there is a better use of existing resources.  On the other hand, h owever, the report also stressed that professionals often deem the number of hours allocated to working in the units, as well as the level of commitment of some partners, to be insufficient. They also highlighted what they consider to be the excessive case load, the lack of appropriate training and juridical support, and the excessive adherence to quantitative indicators compared with qualitative aspects (GEP -MTSSS, 2021).  4 