Impact of minimum income schemes  The RSI is an important measure for mitigating the intensity and severity of poverty. This has been recognised by different authors and studies (e.g. Castro et al ., 2012; Rodrigues et al ., 2016; GEP, 2021), and also by the European Commission (EC) in its latest country reports on Portugal. This is acknowledged by many academics and  professionals working on the ground, to whom " the RSI is understood as a key measure within the scope of social policy " (GEP -MTSSS, 2021: 127).  However, different authors and studies as well as the EC also acknowledge that the measure falls short as regar ds reducing poverty. In fact, the mean figures of the RSI amounts remain very low. According to the latest statistics from the Social Security Institute, in December 2021 the monthly mean values were €119 ,39 per person and €269,96  per household. These amou nts have been fairly stable over the years. As a comparison, according to the latest data issued by Statistics Portugal (INE), the poverty line (60% median threshold) in 2020 was € 6.653 per year or € 554,41 per month.  Pereirinha et al . (2020) analysed the level of income which would be considered to be an adequate income (i.e. the income necessary for someone to live with dignity in Portuguese society). According to the results, a person aged 18 -64 living alone would need an income of €783 per month in orde r to have an adequate living standard, while a couple with a dependent child would need around €1,800 per month. These figures are clearly above the amount of the minimum wage and above the poverty threshold, which “ suggests that applying this poverty thre shold [used by Eurostat]  underestimates the incidence of poverty in Portugal ” (Pereirinha et al ., 2020: 15).  It is perhaps worth mentioning that the OECD’s Better Life Index shows that Portugal ranks low in overall terms. The country is not among the 20% t op performers in any area and indeed is among the 20% bottom performers in a few areas including jobs and earnings, education and skills and subjective well -being. In fact, Portugal registered one of the lowest scores in the OECD as regards general satisfa ction with life (5.4 on a scale of 0 to 10, compared with 6.5 in the OECD as a whole).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  Another source of concern is coverage, as the number of RSI recipients in September 2021 was only slightly more than half of the number of beneficiaries reached at the peak, in March 2010, following steady increases after its introduction.  According to a microsimulation undertaken by Rodrigues, the change in the RSI entitlement rules led to an increase in poverty intensity of about 30%, an increase in inequality as measur ed by the Gini co -efficient of 2%, and by the Atkinson index (e = 2) of more than 9%, between 2009 and 2013 (Rodrigues, 2013).  It further showed that the major positive impacts of the RSI before the reform, which have mostly been in reducing the severity a nd intensity of poverty, have been lost; and that the increased efficiency of the scheme failed to counterbalance the significant decrease in its efficacy. As stressed by Rodrigues, “ an increase of 3.4 percentage points in the ‘poverty reduction efficiency ’ cannot justify a decrease of 18.3 percentage points in the ‘poverty gap efficiency’’ ” (Rodrigues, 2013: 31).  The measures taken in recent years – as part of the current government’s sworn objective to prioritise the fight against poverty, social exclusio n and inequalities through measures aimed at guaranteeing minimum social standards and the reinforcement of social protection – still have not been able to fully counteract the former restrictions.  Yet another area of concern is the effectiveness of the sc heme in promoting the autonomy of beneficiaries, “ either due to the difficulty in adapting the solutions to the concrete problems, or due to the inadequacy of the insertion programmes to the diversity of profiles of the beneficiaries ” (GEP -MTSSS, 2021).  The study released by the GEP -MTSSS (2021) also highlighted deficiencies regarding the insertion programme, notably: its rigidity, deemed to be unsuitable for some beneficiaries; the bureaucracy involved; and the insufficient co -ordination between services/p artners. It also emphasised that monitoring and evaluation of the measure have still not been fully developed, and have actually been set back with the closures of the National Commission for Social Insertion Income and of the unit for studies and planning  of the Social Security Institute. Indeed, there are not many evaluation studies on the RSI and its evolution over time.  Recent evaluations are even scarcer, creating a knowledge gap that needs to be filled, as a way to improve the scheme’s effectiveness a nd efficiency.  The recent creation of the new competence centre for planning, policy and foresight in public administration (PlanAPP) by Decree -Law 21/2021, of 15 March, may represent a cornerstone in this regard. As mentioned in the decree -law, the centre  has been created to monitor and strengthen the different phases of intervention at the public policy level – planning, design, adoption and implementation, monitoring and revision – creating the methods and internal competencies within the public structur e that are necessary for good -quality public action. The centre is intended to assemble the competencies for planning, design and innovation, for ex ante and ex post impact evaluation, and for the monitoring and revision of public policies. “ It should also  strengthen the means for involving, hearing and contacting final recipients of public policy, as well as training and the dissemination of good practice ” (República Portuguesa, 2021: 24).  The centre’s mission includes: i) supporting the definition of pub lic policies and their articulation with the tools for planning and budget programming; and ii) co -ordinating the process of evaluation and quantification of the economic, social and environmental impact of public policies and the implementation of nationa l strategic plans.  Finally, mention should be made of the recent approval of a proposal for the first strategy for fighting poverty in Portugal (2021 -2030), which is deemed to give the reduction in poverty a higher political priority.    Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  15  6 