Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  National minimum income thresholds.  While Romania has no official poverty line, it has a minimum statutory wage  and, as a basic income line, the Guaranteed Minimum Income  (GMI) . The minimum wage  is nationally regulated and its value is periodically revised and approved by the government. Legislation on the minimum wage  regulates the number of monthly hours of work corresponding to the minimum monthly gross salary. For the last three years , the national minimum gross wage  is differentiated  by educatio n level (with /with out higher education) and the work sector (increased for construction sector). All social benefits are expressed as a proportion of the Social Reference Inde x (SRI) . The Index  is defined in the Law on Unemployment and  is intended to link income from social transfers to labour market income . The adequacy of social benefits therefore relies on the updating mechanisms of the SRI , but its value has remained unchanged for the last 12 years.   Brief description of the MI schemes . Three complement ary means -tested schemes are currently in place: the Guaranteed Minimum Income (GMI), a family support allowance (FSA) , and seasonal heating aids (HA).  While all three schemes  will remain, significant changes in their design will take effect from 2022. Fir stly, eligibility criteria and benefit calculations for seasonal HA are expected to change in line with Law No. 226/2021, on vulnerable energy consumers , adopted in November 2021. Secondly, Law No. 196/2016 , on the Minimum Inclusion Income ( MII) is expected to take effect in September 2023, after several delays since being passed in 2016. It provides a legal framework for the integration of all means -tested schemes and harmonisation of targeted social benefits.  The GMI  is the main means -test ed social assistance benefit and is granted to low -income people or families, irrespective of their age or employment status. In place since 1995, Law No. 416.2001 saw the scheme undergo significant revisions in its design and arrangements. It is intended to provide a minimum income level, defined by the GMI threshold. Local authorities implement the scheme, but expenditure on the benefit is paid from the State budget. As a result, the Ministry of Labour and Social Protection (MLSP) is actively involved in (a)monitoring employment services provided to beneficiaries through regional public employment services (PES), (b) managing payments, and (c) supervising implementation procedures.  The FSA  scheme targets low -income families with children. The benefit  was established in 2002, redesigned in 2004 and  reformed again under L aw No. 277/2010 , as part of social assistance reform. The scheme provides a benefit to low -income families with children, differentiated by income level ( two  income brackets), number of child ren and type of family (single/two -parent families). The eligibility testing procedures and implementation requirements are similar to those for the GMI scheme.  The seasonal HA scheme was put in place in 2004  to support low-income families with steadily in creasing energy prices , and was redesigned in 2011. The benefits are intended to compensate  low-income households, totally or  partially , for heating costs during the cold season ( 1 November – 31 March). Benefit levels differ according to the Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  income per fam ily member (9 -11 income brackets) and the type of fuel used for heating ( e.g. central heating systems, natural gas, electricity, wood/coal).  The new Law on vulnerable energy consumers (Law No. 226/2021, GD 1073/2021) modified the formula used to calculate benefits, but maintained the basic logic of the former scheme. It also introduces a new benefit - the supplemental energy consumption benefit – which is intended to partially compensate the costs of electric energy all year.  Expenditure on MI schemes.  The expenditure on GMI benefit, and its sub -components (healthcare insurance contribution until 2018, compulsory home insurance) decreased in recent years, from 0.11% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2016 to 0.05% in 2020. Similarly, expenditure on FSA decre ased from 0.075% of GDP in 2015 (when the benefit level was last updated) to 0.031% in 2020, a decrease of almost 60%. Expenditure on seasonal HA also decreased, from 0.06% of GDP in 2010 to 0.005% in 2020. Overall, in 2020, expenditure on all three target ed benefits amounted to only 0.086% of GDP, accounting for 4.4% of all social security and family benefits.  The discussion here focuses on the means -tested benefits in place for the last three years. At the end of Section 1 there is a brief overview of th e changes expected to take place once the new legislative arrangements take effect.  1.1  Eligibility  Target population of MI schemes. Single pe ople or families (adults cohabitating or married, with or without dependent children , sharing costs and income) are e ligible for any of the means -tested benefit s if they are legal residents of the country, irrespective of their nationality. Non -EU citizens must be granted a legal immigration status  to qualify for benefits. Children are considered dependent if they are less than 18 years, or under  26 years if attending an educational program me. The legal age is 18 but married/unmarried teenagers aged 16 and over , with or without children , and living independently , are eligible for benefits. Those without legal residency or who are homeless are also eligible for the benefits under certain circumstances  (e.g. an affidavit that they did not apply for the benefit elsewhere, and the benefit is granted only  as long as the person is registered with the public social assistance services of that administrative -territorial unit) .  Eligibility for GMI is based on income and assets of the recipient’s entire family and is conditional on proof of willingness to work  for all family members of working age who are fit to work and unemployed (e.g. registering with the employment office, engaging in training or educational programmes, accepting any job offered by the employment office). It is also conditional on the famil y/person providing a certain number of community work hours per month, proportionate to the benefit received (no minimum, the number of hours cannot exceed the normal number of work hours per day/month). The means -testing procedure for FSA applicants is th e same as that for GMI applicants, but eligibility is instead conditional on children’s school attendance. If the children do not attend school or leave school without a proven medical condition, they will not be considered family members when eligibility is assessed and benefit calculated. Similarly, eligibility testing for HA is based on declared income and assets, except for those who declare electricity as their sole energy source for heating purposes (electricity is considered a last resort for those w ithout access to other heat sources, due to its high costs). In these cases, the lack of access to any other energy source must be verified.  Thresholds for GMI and other means -tested schemes.  The GMI scheme provides a net income threshold based on the num ber of family members (see Table 2 in the Annex). The FSA scheme specifies two ‘net income brackets per family member’, for single parents and two -parent families (see Table 3 in the Annex). HA specifies 9 to 11 net income brackets for single people and pe r family member, differentiated by the fuel used for heating purposes. Since 1 November 2021, thresholds are changed for Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  the cold season, with 10 income brackets for all consumers, irrespective of the source of energy used for heating. No equivalence scale  is used to calculate the income per family member for either FSA or HA. All income thresholds refer to a net monthly income and are expressed as a proportion of the SRI. The value of the SRI has not changed since 2008 and is RON 500 (approx. EUR 101) per month.  The GMI threshold varies between 0.283 SRI for a single person to RON 527 (EUR 107) per month for a family of five, with an addition of 0.073 SRI (see Table 2 in the Annex).  The eligibility threshold for the FSA is 1.06 SRI per person (RON 530/EUR  107) per month. A higher level of benefit (depending on the number of children in the family) is granted to families with an income per person lower than 0.4 SRI (RON 200/EUR 40) per month. A lower level of the benefit (similarly differentiated according to the number of children in the family) is granted to families with an income per person between 0.4 SRI and 1.06 SRI (EUR 40 -107) per month (see Table 3 in the Annex).  From 2015 -2021, the eligibility income for HA was up to 1.23 SRI per person per month for natural gas, electricity and wood used as heating fuel, and 2.164 SRI per person per month for those using a central heating system. The benefit level depended on the type of fuel used and the family income bracket (see Table 4 in the Annex). From Nove mber 2021, the eligibility income brackets became the same for all type of fuels used for heating - 10 income brackets are specified, up to RON 1  386 (EUR 280) per family member for families and RON 2  053 (EUR 415) for individuals (see Table 5 in the Annex ). Eligibility testing procedures.  Eligibility is granted based on (a) an income test for all three benefits, and (b) a social inquiry1 into the living conditions of the applicant for the GMI and the FSA. Assessing eligibility for HA requires a social inq uiry for those applicants who have only electric energy to heat their dwelling (this is considered an extreme situation resulting from collective disconnection from other heating systems, or informal living). The aim of the social inquiry is to check wheth er the family/household has no access or no means of accessing any other energy source for heating.  The following incomes are not taken  into account when assessing eligibility for  the GMI, FSA and  HA: (a) other means -tested benefits (GMI, FSA, HA , or occas ional sums granted from the State budget or local budgets as compensation or financial support for exceptional situations  such as flooding, death ), (b) scholarships, vocational scholarships, educational vouchers, or any other educational benefit ( e.g. supp ort for children with special educational needs, national program me ‘money for high school’),  (c) universal State child allowance, (d) any benefit for persons with disabilities, and (e) income from occasional activities carried out by day labourers (as def ined by Law No. 52/2011).  While no aggregate data are publicly available on the incidence of occasional work among GMI beneficiaries, mayors are requested to list all local employers and update the demand for occasional work. Fit -to-work GMI beneficiaries who reject the opportunity to carry out occasional work may be considered unwilling to work and have their benefit suspended.  A list of assets is used to assess non -eligibility for all three means -tested benefits. If the applicant owns any of the assets o r goods on the list, they are automatically ineligible for the benefit. The list of assets was last updated in 2017 (GD 559/2017) and includes: (a) real estate properties (buildings/dwellings besides the current residence or any residential land exceeding 1 000 sq metres in urban areas and 2  000 sq metres in rural areas), (b) any motor vehicles less than 10 years old, except for those adapted to certain disabilities and those used by persons living in difficult -to-access areas, (c) tractors, boats, and any motorised equipment not considered a  1 Professional assessment of the household living conditions, conducted by social workers.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  transportation necessity, (d) savings accounts holding over RON 3  000 (EUR  606), and (e) agricultural land or livestock with a net production value per year that exceeds EUR 1  000 for a single person or EUR 2  500 for a family. This last category is implemented by local councils in accordance with the local type of agriculture and livestock production capacity.  Social inquiries are carried out as part of the initial eligibility assessment procedure, and are reviewed at l east once every six months thereafter as part of the monitoring process. These inquiries are carried out by a social worker or a person responsible for social assistance and are based on a questionnaire to collect information on income, housing, children’s  school attendance, educational attainment level and employment status of adults in the household, goods and access to utilities, health status and healthcare, and disability or other temporary work incapacity (last amended in 2017 by GD 559/2017).  Benefi t level.  The benefit level for GMI is calculated as the difference between the family’s net income and the threshold set for the family, based on number of family members.  The FSA is a fixed amount  per month, according to the family income bracket, type o f family , and number of children ( see Table 3  in the Annex ).  HA levels differ according to family  income brackets and the type of fuel used ( see Table 4  in the Annex ). From  November 2021 , the new Law on vulnerable energy consumers has brought three important changes: (a) it simplifies the way benefits are calculated by using the same 10 income brackets for all type s of fuel /energy sources and calculating the benefit levels as a proportion of the ref erence value2; (b) it does not express income brackets or benefits in terms of the SRI;  and (c) it adds a benefit entitlement for all single persons/families with an income lower than the maximum income threshold  - the energy supplement benefit ( see Table  5). Despite redefining energy vulnerability in broader terms than low  income, the new law links monetary benefits only to level of income , without considering health conditions or age.  1.2  Coverage  When GMI was first introduced in Romania, the threshold was set so as to provide support for the poorest 10% of the population. Since then, the coverage of the benefit has decreased steadily, applying to  less than 10% of at -risk -of-poverty (AROP) households in 2020.  In 2020, the average number of beneficiary famil ies, including those aged 65+, was 169  600. Compared to the number of households (Eurostat data), the proportion of Romanian households covered by the GMI benefit decreased from 3.3% (14.2% of AROP households) in 2015 to 2.3% of all households (9.3% of ARO P households) in 2020.   According to some studies, the coverage  of the GMI scheme is low, with take -up issues relating to the stigmatisation of beneficiaries, who are seen as unworthy, unwilling to work, lazy, or involved in informal and/or illegal activities  (Cernea & Vasile, 2018) , (Arpinte, 2019) . Low political interest in the benefit is suggested by the delays in implementing the 2016 Law on MII, the failure to update GMI thresholds for six ye ars, and the legal amendments focusing solely on strengthening eligibility conditions. Data on take -up are not available. The last systematic analysis of the beneficiary population and vulnerable groups eligible for GMI was carried out in preparation for t he National Strategy for Social Inclusion 2015 -20203.  2 Reference value is differentiated by type  of heating source . 3 http://www.mmuncii.ro/j33/images/Documente/Familie/2016/SF_BancaMondiala_RO_web.pdf   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  A breakdown of data on the number s of people  in beneficiary families, age of adults benefit ting from GMI, proportion of children among beneficiaries , and  employment status of adult beneficiaries is not available . However, between 2018 -2020, t he average number of GMI beneficiaries checked by the  regional employment office s every six months (as per t he GMI legislation)  varied between 11% and 14% of the total number of GMI recipients4.  Similarly, the l evels of benefit and eligibility thresholds for the FSA and HA have not been updated since 2015 . The proportion of households with children receiving the FSA decreased since 2011, from 11% of all households with  dependent children  (41% of AROP households with dependent children ) to 6% in all households with children  (25% of AROP households ) in 2020. This is the consequence of not updating the benefit level since 2015.  1.3  Adequacy  GMI benefits are calculated so as to  bring the income of a family up to a minimum guaranteed level. The eligibility threshold thus provides information on the adequacy of the benefit.  The GMI eligibility threshold for a family is defined according to the number of family members, but the eq uivalence scale is not evidence -based5. The GMI threshold is expressed as a proportion of the SRI, which should guarantee its adequacy. However, the value of the SRI has not been updated since 2008, compromising the relationship of GMI thresholds to the m inimum levels of work -related incomes. The GMI threshold has been updated only occasionally, and the updating has represented a change of the formula (i.e. a change in the proportion of the SRI) (see Table 2 in the Annex).  Between 2014  and 2021 , the level  of the GMI threshold was  not updated, instead retaining a constant nominal value. Meanwhile , the minimum wage  increased by more than 200% and the minimum pension  benefit  doubled between 2015  and 2020. The value of the GMI threshold for a single person dep reciated , from 24% of the minimum net salary in 2012 to 10.2% in 2021. As a percentage of the AROP threshold, the GMI threshold decreased by 50% over the period 2014 -2020, from 29% to 14%. The number of beneficiaries increased slightly since 2015, due to  the increase in the eligibility threshold , yet the number s of beneficiary families /individuals6 decreased by 31%.  The situation of GMI recipients, particularly their financial means, is reviewed every six months, and changes in income must be reported within 30 days. The adequacy of the benefit is less threatened by faulty implementation of the law, and more by the way the eligibility threshold and SRI are set and updated. According to Law No. 225/2021, from March 2022, the SRI will be updated annually to reflect the inflation rate. While a transparent mechanism to update social benefits was much needed, updating social assistance benefits with the inflation rate will not provide an adequate link between these benefits and increases in the statu tory minimum wage or minimum social pensions.  The GMI does not represent an effective means of combating poverty, due to its very low level. Nor has the GMI scheme provided an effective path to entering the labour market for those with limited employabilit y or the long -term unemployed.   4 Proportion approximated based on the number of persons register ed at the employment offices for GMI, provided quarterly by the MLSP  (Statistical Bulletin on Unemployment) and the number of households receiving the benefit  (in the absence of the information on the number of working -age adults) . 5 The MLSP  did not provide any reasoning for the adoption of this particular equivalence sca le as part of the substantiation of the Law on GMI or MII . 6 Number of persons covered by the benefit is not publicly available . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  One advantage to being  a GMI beneficiary in the last six years  was coverage by healthcare insurance. This is important, as not all those not in employment are covered by health insurance - coverage applies only to those who previously contributed to the social insurance system or to new graduates7. In addition, the State budget covers contributions to compulsory home insurance for GMI recipients who own their own home.  1.4  Links with other benefits  The GMI benefit is conditiona l on proven willingness to work (registering as unemployed for those out of work, accepting school/vocational programmes proposed by the employment office, and not rejecting any job offer) and community work. By design, the scheme is linked to employment s trategies and activation policies. GMI beneficiaries who are of working age, not in employment, and fit to work8  are required to register as unemployed9. Employment offices provide a ctivation program mes targeting beneficiaries with low employability , as  well as the long -term unemployed .  The effectiveness of these programmes is low, and data show a constant increase in the proportion of (very) long -term unemployed over the last 10 years. Cooperation between local authorities supervising current GMI benef iciaries and employment offices is mostly limited to exchange of administrative information. Mainstreaming integrated community -based social services10 will strengthen the link between the GMI scheme and employment programmes. Finally, in September 2021, t he government adopted an emergency ordinance (GEO 101/2021), which stipulates that GMI beneficiaries could continue to receive the GMI benefit for six months after becoming employed. The GEO also stipulates that Second Chance programmes will be offered to all GMI beneficiaries who are unemployed and have less than lower secondary education. The legislative measure is the result of a 2020 study by the National Social Inspection and Payment Agency, on the implementation of the GMI scheme and the identificatio n of measures to increase employability among GMI beneficiaries11.  GMI beneficiaries are entitled to receive family support allowance (for beneficiary families with dependent children) and seasonal HA. The three schemes are interconnected, although the el igibility thresholds vary, with the lowest threshold for the GMI benefit and the highest for seasonal HA. As the three schemes use  similar methodologies for means  testing/income  testing , they will be integrated into a single scheme – the minimum inclusion benefit - from September 202312.   Finally, all social benefits for which eligibility thresholds or benefit levels are expressed in terms of the SRI are interconnected. Currently, most social assistance and family benefits are expressed in terms of SRI, ex cept for the universal child allowance and,  7 Unregistered unemployed, occasional workers or self -employed are not automatically covered by health insurance, although they can choose to  enrol . 8 Unfit to work : those with a temporary invalidity, persons with certain disabilities , or those parenting ch ildren under the age of seven  years . 9 The proportion of those who register as unemployed and receive GMI is quite low (about 13% of the recipients during 2019 and 2020).  In the absence of publicly available data on total number of working -age adults and r egistered unemployed in households of GMI recipients, the estimation is based on data provided by the unemployment offices on the number of unemployed GMI recipients who registered with the employment offices , and the number of recipients.  10 Integrated com munity services are being piloted in 139 communities, but the mainstreaming of the program me has been delayed due  to the COVID -19 pandemic  (http://serviciicomunitare.ro ).  11 https://www.mmanpis.ro/wp -content/uploads/2021/04/Raport -privind -Campania -nationala -de-verificare -a-stabilirii -si-acordarii -ajutorului -social -si-pentru -identificarea -masurilor -de-crestere -a-ocuparii -persoanelor -apte -de-munca.pdf   12 According to GEO 130/202 1, implementation of the Law on MII has been p ostponed for the fourth time  and is expected to take effect in September 2023 . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  more recently, energy benefits (including seasonal HA) for vulnerable energy consumers (Law No. 226/2021).  The GMI scheme has two major weaknesses. Firstly, it fails to link with labour market integration of the most vulnerable category of low -income working -age adults, and secondly, its adequacy is low, due to its low level and failure to update eligibility thresholds. In the absence of well -established community -level integrated social assistance services, the G MI scheme fails to provide sufficient incentives to promote and stimulate adequate social integration of low -income and marginalised households. Some conditionalities that are already embedded in GMI schemes and in other minimum income schemes (e.g. school  attendance of children in FSA beneficiary families) would be more effective if augmented by appropriate social assistance services.  1.5  MII : a forthcoming integrat ed benefit  In October 2016, Law No. 196/2016 was passed, replacing the three main means -tested b enefits (GMI, FSA and HA) with a single, unifying benefit: minimum inclusion income (MII) . Implementation of the Law has been postponed several times and is now expected to take effect in September 2023 (GEO 130/2021). To smooth the transition to the new legislative framework and to ease the implementation of the current schemes, in December 2 016 GEO 93/2016 unified and standardised the eligibility testing procedures for all three benefits.  The MII is expected to better coordinate existing benefits and stimulate employment by intensifying institutional cooperation to increase effectiveness of activation measures and by reducing the marginal tax rate on low -income work. Three important changes  are foreseen in the new scheme: (a) unification and simplification of means -testing procedures; (b) introduction of the provision of up to 50% deductible income from work, to stimulate formal employment; and (c) significant increase in benefit levels and eligibility thresholds (as a proportion of the SRI) to increase the adequacy of benefits and coverage among the poorest 20%. However, the design of MII embed activation policies to only a limited extent, as the law does not provide a framework for better c ooperation between local authorities and county level/regional employment offices.  More emphasis on education, skill enhancement, and development of social economy structures could improve the soundness and impact of the forthcoming scheme. In 2021, the c urrent GMI law was amended, with GEO 101/2021 requiring employment offices to cooperate with county -level school inspectorates and to prioritise the option of enrolment in a Second Chance programme for GMI beneficiaries without an education or who have not  completed the lower secondary education cycle. Beneficiaries are required to enrol in education programmes offered, and local authorities must provide support if necessary.  However, since the Law on MII was passed, the design of the current GMI scheme has  been changed. Unless the Law is amended to reflect the new arrangements set up for the GMI during 2019 -2021, the employment offices will continue to play a rather marginal role when the Law comes into effect in September 2023.  2 Link with labour market acti vation  The legislative framework on GMI uses work as a condition of receiving the benefit rather than as part of a strategy for social inclusion. Applicants who are out of work are required to registered as unemployed and to check in with the regional empl oyment office every six months (pre -2021, every three months) in order to provide proof that they did not turn down any job, training or education programme offered by the employment office. City halls are required to organise and manage community work act ivities and collect information from local employers on occasional work. However, the legislative design does not provide specific elements to: (a) Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  increase and facilitate interinstitutional cooperation between actors involved in GMI recipient support, (b)  provide legal means to employment offices (e.g. amending the legislation on unemployment and employment policies) of addressing GMI recipients as a distinct vulnerable group and monitoring their outcomes, and (c) provide a legal framework for city halls t o manage a workforce that is not bound by an employment contract and is required to carry out only few hours of work per month.  The legislation on employment and GMI is less empowering for the institutions tasked with jointly increasing employability and job opportunities for unemployed GMI beneficiaries. It is also punitive in respect of recipients who appear unwilling to work.  The forthcoming MII and the newly piloted community integrated social services are expected to shift the focus of activation poli cies towards social inclusion by providing more tools to institutions involved in activation and stimulating interinstitutional cooperation.  Registered unemployed and conditionalities for unemployed   All GMI beneficiaries of working age who are deemed fit to work and are currently not in education or employment, or who do not have any dependent in care (i.e. children less than 7 years of age, or under 18 if the child has a disability or is a dependent relative) are required to register as unemployed with th e county -level employment office.  If they fail to register as unemployed, the benefit is terminated or, depending on the situation, they are not considered family members for another adult in the family applying for benefit.  Those who are  registered unem ployed need to check -in with the employment office on request or every  six months. These check -ins are intended to reaffirm the ir willingness to work  and confirm that they did not refuse any job offer or training/educational programme. In 2021 , the period for the se regular check -ins was increased from three months to six  months (GEO 101/2021). However, GMI beneficiaries must check -in whenever requested to do so by the employment office. The extension of the time span was justified by the increased difficult y of check -ins during the COVID -19 pandemic. The costs associated with this practice (transport, time, paperwork) are high for some beneficiaries and are unevenly distributed geographically, disadvantaging be neficiaries residing in remote or rural areas. T his represents a significant cost for m any  GMI beneficiaries, an important proportion of whom live in rural areas (86.2%  in 201613). Rejection of a job, training or education programme leads to termination of the benefit. Once the benefit has been terminat ed, the recipient can reapply only after 12 months have elapsed. During the COVID -19 pandemic, the social inquiry requirements were suspended, but the requirement to check -in with the unemployment office was maintained.  Data on the number of GMI beneficia ries required to register as unemployed are not publicly available.  However, the National Employment Agency provides the number of persons who receive confirmation as part of the requirements for GMI beneficiaries14. As GMI beneficiaries are required  to ob tain a certificate (visa) attesting their status as unemployed and search ing for work  every six months, semi -annual  data on the numbers requesting a certificate for GMI give a rough estimate of the number of people  who are unemployed and fit to work among GMI beneficiaries.  The net average beneficiaries who registered as unemployed in a  six-month period in order to  receive  13 According to a report of the National Payment and Social Inspection Agency, available at https://www.mmanpis.ro/wp -content/upload s/2016/06/Raport -PR-Anexe.pdf  14 MLSP, Statistical Bulletin,  Employment, Unemployment and Unemployed Social Protection,  http://mmuncii.ro/j33/index.php/ro/transpare nta/statistici/buletin -statistic   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  the GMI benefit during the first half of 2021  was about 49 50015. The number of adults of working age in the total GMI beneficiary population is unknown and is not disclosed in the recent thematic report of the National Agency for Social Inspection and Payment and the National Employment Agency (MLSP, 2021). The report just gives a n overview of the structure of the benefic iary population based on 40  000  (of 1  766  600) beneficiary families. According to th e report,  31% are single  household s over 65 years, 20% are single  households less than 65 years, and 17.1% are single -parent households. Extrapolating to  the overall benefi ciary population, roughly 215  000  working -age adults benefitted from the GMI scheme in February 2021 when the study was conducted  and some 23% of the adults in GMI recipient households were registered as unemployed.  The conditionality is important, as the number of actual unemployed, especially long -term unemployed (measured by survey data using the International Labour Organization (ILO) definition of unemployment16), is significantly higher than the number of registered unemployed. Unregistered unemployed  are mostly occasional workers, those with no work history, or those self -employed in subsistence agriculture. These are the most vulnerable people on the labour market and increasing their employability is especially challenging. Registering with the empl oyment office is a first step towards increasing their job opportunities.  Employment services and activation strategies .  No special individualised activation plans or job integration agreements are in place for GMI beneficiaries , who receive the same tre atment as any other unemployed person receiving employment services.  GMI beneficiaries are not regarded as a distinct vulnerable category on the labour market.  Individualised activation plans, along with an assessment of employability, are compulsory for a ll long -term unemployed17. Since 2017 ( Law No. 250/2017 and Order of the MLSP 254/2018) , employment offices are required to sign a labour market integration agreement with all long -term unemployed who do not fall under the incidence of the youth guarantee,  within 18 months of their registration as unemployed. Activation measures covered by the agreement are: (a) information and professional counselling, (b) mediation services, (c) vocational training, (d)assessment and certification of professional competen cies acquired by other than  formal means, and (e) counselling and assistance for starting an independent activity or business. The Law s tates that agreements must define a specific time span, according to the identified needs of the recipient and the activ ation services  proposed .  These services are provided by public employment offices and by private accredited providers. In 2020, according to the National Register for Employment Service Providers, 53 private providers were accredited for either information and counselling services or mediation services , with 21 providers accredited for both18. The accreditation methodology do es not consider the  caseload for activation , nor does it impose specific requirements to organise employment services.  The  Law does not specify any social inclusion measures beyond those on labour market  integration. From  September 2021 (GEO 101/2021), however, it will regulate the common issue of incompletion of lower secondary education. A 2018 study  15 Quarterly number of unemployed people requesting a GMI  proof , minus those exiting the unemployment system due to not showing up for the visa, according to the statistical bulletins on Employment and Unemployment, MLSP, T able 10  (http://mmuncii.ro/j33/index.php/ro/transparenta/statistici/buletin -statistic ). 16 Data provided by the National Institute for Statistics, TEMPO -online database . 17 A social integration contract is offered only to you ng people e xiting childcare institutions, and these contracts also require in -work accompaniment services .  18 https://www.anofm.ro/upload/2997/2020.pdf   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  (Cernea & Vasile, 2018)  showed  that 85% of adult GMI beneficiaries ha d not completed lower secondary  education, while 48% have not completed primary education. From November 2021, employment offices must cooperate with county -level school inspectorates  to provide opportunities to GMI beneficiaries who have no t completed lower secondary education . In turn, the GMI beneficiaries are not allowed to reject the offers without losing the ir benefit. This is an important amendment, as those  with less than lower  secondary education level cannot certify their non -formally acquired skills and competencies or enter any form of professional/vocational training programme. GMI beneficiaries finding themselves in this situation will be helped  (indeed required ) to enter the Second Chance programme. GEO 101/2021 explicitly sets out the basis  for cooperation between employment offices and county -level school inspectorates.  In order to encourage work, the scheme (a) rewards formal employment (based on individual employment c ontracts) of any beneficiary by adding 15% to the GMI benefit to which the recipient/family is entitled, and (b) does not consider, when assessing eligibility, income from occasional work activities (as defined by the Law on Day Labourers). From November 2 021, beneficiaries taking up employment will continue to be granted the benefit for an additional six months.  A series of employer benefits also seeks to stimulate the employment of various vulnerable categories, along with benefits for those taking up em ployment. These do not directly target GMI beneficiaries, although they are similarly entitled to them (see Table 8 in the Annex).  Community work and take -up of occasional work  GMI beneficiaries of working age, who are fit -to-work and unemployed are required to carry out a certain number of hours of community work, depending on the level of benefit received. The calculation considers the payment per hour, in accordance with the n ational statutory minimum wage. Community work hours are transferable between unemployed working -age adults within the same family who are fit to work. Mayors are responsible for developing an action plan for community work activities. However, this aims t o discourage the informally employed from applying for GMI benefit, rather than targeting social inclusion of the unemployed. Its definition makes community work a punitive rather than empowering means of labour market integration.  Since 2018, mayors are required to develop an overview of all occasional work opportunities, in collaboration with local employers. GMI beneficiaries are not allowed to refuse offers of occasional work without losing their entitlement to the GMI.  Taking u p work and benefit tapering  Until recently, entering the labour market was usually accompanied by exiting the GMI scheme, as even a minimum salary would lead to an increase in net income that made  most families ineligible for benefit . GEO 101/2021  stipulat es that , from November 2021,  an unemployed beneficiary who signs an individual work contract for at least 24 months  can continue to claim 100% of the GMI benefit for the following six months. The amendment was the result of an analysis of the employment se rvices offered to GMI beneficiaries, particularly their impact on the employability of GMI beneficiaries and incentivising employment19. Although the analysis brought new insight, it omitted several aspects that could provide a thorough understanding of th e employment status of GMI beneficiaries.  Institutional cooperation   19 https://www.mmanpis.ro/wp -content/uploads/2021/04/Raport -privind -Campania -nationala -de-verificare -a-stabilirii -si-acordarii -ajutorului -social -si-pentru -identificarea -masurilor -de-crestere -a-ocuparii -persoanelor -apte -de-munca.pdf   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  Activation and employment stimulation strategies embedded in the GMI scheme require a certain level of interinstitutional cooperation between:  City hall (local, decentrali sed authorities),  the county level/regional unemployment offices and county -level agencies for social inspection and payments . This cooperation refers to the exchange of information on beneficiaries and their employment /entitlement status ; City hall and local entrepreneurs /employers, to develop a meaningful community work plan and opportunities for occasional work for GMI beneficiaries ; County level /regional employment offices and county -level school inspectorates , on the organi sation of Second Chan ce program mes and the ir demand ;  County level/regional employment offices and employers/accredited training providers for exchange of information on training/job demands/ opportunities and apprenticeship  opportunities.  However, activation plans and agreements do not involve any co operation requirements between different institutions.  As community integrated services are emerging (still at pilot stage), these could be mainstreamed if the legislation on activation and GMI was amended to facilitate interinstitutional cooperation.  San ctions   Failing to comply with  employment -related measures leads to suspension  and/or termination of the entitlement. If beneficiaries fail to obtain their visa within six months of approval  or from the ir last check -in, they will be temporary suspended for a 30-day period. Further failure to comply means they are cut from the benefit , or cut off as a family member. This also holds true for the requirements to carry out community work and to take -up any occasional work  offered .  Any  refusal to take up a training program me, educational program me (Second Chance program me) or any job offer made by employment services leads to benefit termination , and the person cannot reapply until 12 months have elapsed .  Impa ct of activation services on GMI beneficiaries  Few studies have been carried out to explore and assess the relationship between the GMI and employment measures. A study published in 2018 (Cernea & Vasile, 2018)  emphasi sed the gen eral myths shap ing public opinion on GMI beneficiaries and the negative impact of the mass  media discourse on the legislative process for t he GMI (transforming activation policies in to punitive instruments). The image of unworthy (mostly Roma) beneficiarie s, who are not willing to work and are simply fooling the State to obtain benefits to which they are not really entitled , is widespread and populates public and political debate and discourse  (Raț, 2011) . Th is discourse  is somewhat supported by the lack of  data on the employment status of beneficiaries and their participation in employment program mes. The study found that , in 2016 , less than 1% of GMI beneficiaries refused a job  and more than 9 0% were never offered a job. This suggests  a rather l ow institutional capacity among the PES to provide work opportunities or other skill -enhancing program mes, especially to the rural unemployed  (Vasile and Dohotaru, 2018; Țoc and Buligescu, 2020) . This is a structural challenge of  active labour market polic ies ( ALMPs ) in Romania.   In February 2021 , for the first time, the National Agency for Social Inspection and Payments  (Agenția Națională pentru Plăți și Inspecție Socială , ANPIS)  and National Agency for Employment of the Labour Force  (Agenția Națională pe ntru Ocuparea Forței de Muncă , ANOFM)  carried out  a joint  assessment of the way GMI entitlement is established in fact and of the employment measures available to non -working GMI beneficiaries. While the thematic report (Ministerul Muncii și Protecției Sociale , ANPIS/AJPIS, ANOFM/AJOFM, 2021)  did not identify the exact number of GMI beneficiaries registered as unemployed , or the services provided through  labour Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  market integration agreement s, it tackles the issue of all work ing-age  beneficiaries, not only those who are required to register with the employment offices  (single parents of children under seven  years, persons with disabilities , work capacity, employability, willingness to work , etc. ). The study concluded that the in effectiveness of employment program mes for GMI beneficiaries stems primarily from the high proportion of work ing-age beneficiaries (a) with at most primary or no education and (b) aged over 50 years, with a series of health problems. The assessment could prompt a useful rethink of the social and labour market integration of GMI beneficiaries, and the study itself highlights the need to develop integrated community services (see Table 9  in the Annex ).   3 Link to social  services and integrated provision of tar geted social services  Needs assessment and social services for the GMI  Currently, assessment s of GMI applica tions are  based on the social inquiry (GD 50/2011, with subsequent amendments) , which collects information on: income by source, composition of the  family, employment status, presence of certified disabilities, assets, housing characteristics and heating sources. GMI beneficiaries are assessed regularly, at least every six months or whenever needed (L aw No. 416/2001). The purpose of the social inquir y is to assess eligibility for GMI benefits , thus it revolves around eligibility criteria , with h ealth, housing, employment and work capacity -related aspects only  secondary. The social inquiry is conducted by social workers within the social assistance dep artments (SPASs) of city halls , or by an employee of the city hall in charge  of the social benefits , where SPASs do not exist20. The thematic report of ANPIS (Ministerul Muncii și Protecției Sociale , ANPIS/AJPIS, ANOFM/AJOFM, 2021)  show ed the shortage of social assistance and social work  professionals at local level , with a significant proportion of city halls  without any specialised personnel , especially in rural areas. Many of the needs of GMI are overlooked , such as the need for specialised services to accompany efforts to increase employability of working -age adults, and counselling on other rights and access to social benefits and services . The take -up of the benefit is affected by the lack of expertise to counsel vulne rable groups about their entitlements ( see Table 9  in the Annex ). During the COVID -19 state of emergency, no social inquiries were carried out, impacting the most vulnerable groups.  Law No. 196/2016  on MII (expected to take effe ct in September 2023)  stipu lates a more integrated assessment and intervention strategy, with community -level integrati on of personali sed employment and activation intervention plans and social assistance services. However, this requires the piloted i ntegrated community services  to be mainstreamed .  Romania started putting in place a legislative framework for integrated community services  in 2015, with the National Strategies on Poverty Reduction and Promotion of Social Inclusion 2015 -2020. A first pilot project on a minimum basic so cial services package for children and families with children was carried out by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) during 2014 -2018. Legislation was put in place to regulate the activity of community nurses (GEO 18/2007, GD 324/2019) and set up q uality standards for integrated community services (Order of the MLSP 29/2019).  Integrated community services are intended to identify social cases, conduct extensive and multidisciplinary needs assessment , and  help individuals/families to access the servi ces to which they are entitled and/or which do meet their needs  (e.g. through individuali sed action plans ). The multidimensional assessment includes an evaluation  20 Not all city  halls can afford to set up a public  social assistance service . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  of financial and material means, educational needs and gaps, health status (including chronic  health issues and preventable health issues), employment status, employability and activation requirements, and housing. Needs assessment, along with all preventive services and intervention plans , are under the responsibility of a multidisciplinary team  comprising at  least one social worker, a school counsellor, a health mediator, a school mediator (if necessary ) and a community nurse. Local multidisciplinary teams cooperate with the county -level/regional public employment offices, other private employmen t service providers , and speciali sed social assistance services at regional/county level.  A county -level support and supervision unit  (Unitate Județeană de Suport și Supervizare, UJSS) is established at the social assistance directorates (decentrali sed cou nty-level services). This unit signs a supervision contract with the community level multidisciplinary team  members21.  A survey carried out by ANPIS on 2  095 community social workers  found that information and counselling activities are perceived as a priority for vulnerable segments, followed by actual social services such as in -home care, social canteens, and day centres (Ministerul Muncii și Protecției Sociale,  ANP IS/AJPIS, ANOFM/AJOFM, 2021) .  The provision of the first integrated community level services started as a European -funded pilot project in 2017  and was implemented only in 2018. I ts first objective was to put in place (a) 40 county -level interdisciplinary teams to coordinate the teams providing the community integrated services , and (b) 139 local teams in rural and small urban communities with above -average and severe marginali sation. In April 2021, only 17 out of the 40 counties had a ful l coordination team  in place , while 23 lacked an expert on social services. Of the 139 communities in the pilot, 3% had no team in place whatsoever. 126 communities hired a community nurse, and 87 communities benefit ted from  the services of a school counse llor. Only 48 communities (35% of the target) had a social worker. Overall, a school mediator for the Roma population was hired in 74 communities, but only 10 communities had a health mediator for the Roma population22.  Administrative procedures for servi ce provision   There is no social integration agreement or action plan in place for GMI beneficiaries. A contract has been put in place between providers of integrated community services and vulnerable families23  , yet the practice has not been mainstreame d, as integrated community services have been  slow to emerge.  The services  through  these social integration agreements relate to  (a) preventive social assistance, (b) preventive healthcare, (c) stimulating early childhood education and school attendance, (d) housing, (e) employment, and (f) legalising documents on housing, guardianship, etc . The assistance provided falls within one  of the following categories: identification of needs, prevention, information, monitoring, referral to speciali sed services, assisting beneficiaries in applying for benefits, obtaining legal documents, or accessing speciali sed social services. The contrac t imposes certain responsibilities  on the beneficiaries, such as sending children to school (if appropriate transportation means are provided by local authorities due to the intervention of the team) and attending all appointments mediated by the team with  different service providers . These are explicitly stated in the contract and failure to comply leads  to termination of the contract. Targeted services are generally provided in the larger cities  that have higher administrative and financial capacity, but are rather ad  hoc  and based on availability.   21 http://serviciicomunitare.ro/metodologii  22 http://serviciicomunitare.ro/evenimente/eveniment -33 23 Contract pentru acordarea serviciilor comunitare integrate pentru combaterea sărăciei și excluziunii sociale prin intermediul Serviciului de Asistență Comunitară din cadrul Serviciului Public de Asistență Socială , http://serviciicomunitare.ro/metodologii   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  15  Article 122 of t he Social Assistance Law stipulates that the identification and assessment of individual, family or group needs, and the subsequent development of intervention plans must be carried out by socia l workers, and the caseload per social worker cannot exceed 300 beneficiaries. However, an ANPIS  assessment of the services provided to the GMI beneficiaries at local level revealed a shortage of social workers and an excessive  workload (Ministerul Muncii și Protecției Sociale , ANPIS/AJPIS, ANOFM/AJOFM, 2021)  (see Table 9  in the Annex ).  The s hortage of professionals was one of the main issues faced by the UNICEF pilot project in Bacău county  between 2014 and 2018 (UNICEF, 2019) . Even though salaries for the members of the multidisciplinary team providing the integrated services were supported by the project, hiring, and retaining social workers has been a challenge.  Use of  speciali sed social services by GMI beneficiaries  Local authorities are responsible for the provision of preventive social services, while speciali sed social services are usuall y provided regionally or at county level , and are available in the county residence city or in larger  cities. Support services at local level are provided  – if at all - only to older people in the form of in -home care. Small administrative -territorial unit s struggle to provide even basic preventive services. In theory, the social inquiry to assess the situation of GMI applicants/beneficiaries should assess both the financial and material situation of the household and identify the specific needs of the fami ly members . The social worker carrying out the inquiry is also the person who should refer people to they specialised services  they need . In practice, however, needs assessment is dissociated from financial/material assessment and no data are available on how many GMI beneficiaries access specialised social assistance services. Social inquiries assess ing vulnerable GMI beneficiary households do not collect any specific information on the us e of specialised services , and in many cases fail to identify indivi dual needs requiring specialis t intervention.   The demand for s pecialised  or targeted social services outstrips supply. While no specific disincentives to take up these services are embedded in the GMI scheme, accessing these services is associated with h igh costs for the beneficiary (usually transport/accommodation costs)  and often renders them unaffordable . Unevenly distributed costs of accessing specialised services, along with a scarcity of services , leads to low coverage with  low take -up by GMI benefi ciaries (see Table 9  in the Annex ). 4 