Summary  Romania has one minimum income (MI) support scheme , the guaranteed minimum income (GMI), and two complementary means -tested schemes , the family support allowance (FSA) and seasonal heating aids (HA). The design of all three benefits underwent signi ficant change as part of the 2011 social assistance reforms. Over the past 20 years, t he GMI scheme evolved from a scheme that granted substantial discretionary power to local authorities (means -testing procedures, eligibility criteria , funding) into a sch eme with standardi sed and simplified means -testing procedures, with benefits supported from the State budget and managed by county -level organi sations of central government agencies. The decision to s tandardi se assessment procedures and re -centrali se fundi ng was in response to  low administrative and financial capacity among local administrations, which created significant horizontal inequity. Nevertheless, the uneven development of local social assistance public services ( Servici i Public e de Asistență Socială , SPASs) and availability of professionals across local administrative units continues to present a challenge to the effectiveness of these schemes.  Personnel shortage s at local level, particularly  professional social workers , and a lack of integrated community -based social assistance services is an important barrier to effective implementation of the GMI scheme . These issues persist despite the standardi sed eligibility testing procedures and the supervision provided by county -level organi sations of the governmental agency for payments and social inspectio n. While the design of the GMI scheme includes elements supporting labour market and social inclusion (e.g. active job search, community work), the effectiveness of activation measures is a ffected by the low capacity of local administrations, which struggle with a shortage of professional social assistance services to assess needs and provide integrated support/guidance to vulnerable individuals, low capacity to coordinate with county -level/ regional employment offices, as well as difficulties in organising effective community work for beneficiaries. Similarly, county -level employment services have low capacity to reach out to the most vulnerable segments, especially those without a work histo ry and who are living in remote/ rural areas without employment opportunities. The GMI scheme thus became a monetary supporting measure rather than a measure facilitating social inclusion. As a result, the elements intended as instruments of social/ labour  market inclusion are used to sanction opportunistic behaviour and prevent abuse of the scheme by those unwilling to work or those working in the informal sector.  All means -tested schemes s aw a deterioration in their adequacy  in recent years . Eligibility t hresholds and benefit levels have not been updated in seven years and there is no transparent mechanism to update or link them to labour market -related incomes.  Several new legislative measures promise improvement s in the implementation of MI  schemes a nd the adequacy of MI benefits. First ly, the Law on the Minimum Inclusion Income  (MII) , adopted in 2016 and expected to take effect in 2022, replaces the three benefits with a single benefit, with a redefined focus on social inclusion. Secondly, community int egrated services are in the process of being mainstreamed and promise to ensure a more integrat ed approach to social inclusion. Finally, a new law was passed in 2021 , putting in place a transparent mechanism for updating social benefits.  The following sect ions, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integratio n with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  the evidence on the impac t on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex (7.2.) outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as wel l as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicat es the groups on which support needs to be targeted.   1 