Governance mechanisms  Institutional arrangements and delegation/cooperation structures  The GMI scheme is a national benefit, managed and implemented by local authorities and financially supported from the State budget ( see Figure 4).  At national level , the M LPS is responsible for the design of the GMI scheme, organisation of the social/employment services in the scheme, monitoring and assessing implementation, and handing out payments. It discharges this responsibility through (a) the Directorate for Policies an d Social Benefits  (Direcția Politici și Beneficii Sociale ), (b) the Directorate for Social Services  (Direcția Servicii Sociale ), (c) the ANPIS , and (d) the ANOPFM .   The Directorates are responsible for the design of the scheme, particularly the services associated with the GMI benefit. The ANPIS administers the database of the beneficiaries, controls/monitors and assesses the implementation of the scheme and adjacent services (social inspection) , and manages payments. The ANOFM is in charge of the employme nt/activation measures for GMI beneficiaries and also manages the database of GMI beneficiaries registered as unemployed.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  16  County/regional level  Much of the GMI scheme is administered at county/regional level. Benefit payments are processed, social services  are monitored/assessed/inspected, and employment services are provided by the county -level devolved organisations of the ANPIS and ANOFM (AJPISs and AJOFMs).  Local level  Eligibility testing, calculation of benefits and any additional needs assessment ar e done by local authorities and SPASs , and will soon be undertaken by community integrated services . Social services are organi sed and financed (with some exceptions , such as the salaries of the community integrated team) by local authorities  and  decentral ised bodies  (with local budgets) . Local social services cooperate  and receive support from  county -level social assistance services ( Direcțiile Generale de Asistență Socială și Protecție a Copilului , DGASPC ). The latter are in charge of  speciali sed social assistance services. The soon -to-be-mainstreamed community integrated services are  established by city hal ls and  are under the supervision of a county -level unit, the UJSS. The latter is accountable to a series of count y-level organi sations, some decentrali sed (DGASPC)  and others devolved  (AJPIS, CJRAE24, DJSP25). The social inquiry to assess eligibility for all three means -tested benefits (GMI, FSA , HA) is carried out by a social worker (or equivalent)  within the SPAS, or, if the re is no SPAS , then within the city hall department in charge of  social benefits.  Cooperation between local and county level institutions   The mayor signs the GMI decision,  and the benefit level is calculated accordingly. By the fifth of each month, the mayor must send several documents to the AJPIS: (a) all documents for newly approved applications, (b) the situation of all beneficiaries and the benefits to be paid, (c) the monthly activity plan for community work, (d) the list of people who are fit to work in the benef iciary families.  Within five days of receiving that information, AJPIS communicates the situation of those fit to work to the AJOFMs and the territorial work inspection offices. Within five days, they return the employment status of those fit to work, inc luding whether the latter signed an individual work contract, left to work abroad, rejected participation in a training/vocational programme, or refused a job offer. A similar communication is stipulated between AJOFMs and school inspectorates for benefici aries with an educational attainment level below lower secondary education. Collaboration formalities are based on a protocol signed between the ANPIS and ANOFM/work inspectorate/school inspectorates. This procedure ensures that the employment status of GM I beneficiaries fit to work is verified monthly.  Any changes in the situation of the beneficiary family – notified by the county -level employment offices or beneficiaries (within 15 days) – is reported by the mayor’s office to the AJPIS. The director of t he AJPIS signs a decision and communicates the decision to the beneficiary within 30 days.  The payment of benefits and monitoring of implementation by the ANPIS has improved communication between employment offices and local authorities, although this rema ins limited to the exchange of information.  Monitoring practices   Monitoring is embedded in the information exchange between city halls and AJPISs, AJPISs and AJOFMs, AJPISs and work inspectorates, and AJOFMs and school  24 County Centre for Resources an d Assistance in Education ( Centrul Județean de Resurse și Asistență în Educație ), under the authority of the Ministry of Education.  25 County Directorates for Public Health ( Direcțiile Județene de Sănătate Publică ), under the authority of the Ministry of He alth.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  17  inspectorates. The information exchanged relates to the conditions that would lead to the termination of the GMI benefit, but does not include any indicator of the effectiveness of employment programmes or activation measures. This means that it is only possible to monitor the type of employment services provided to GMI beneficiaries. The AJPISs also condu ct regular spot checks of the implementation process and monitor accredited local social assistance services involved in providing the benefit. Local authorities (the mayor’s office that signs the decisions, and the local public social assistance services handling the applications) are also inspected for irregularities, with the possibility of another social inquiry being carried out, under the supervision of a social inspector.  Evaluations   The only regular evaluation carried out is embedded in the AJPIS cross -checking the documentation sent by the mayor’s office. If irregular situations or legal infringements are identified, the director of the AJPIS can ask the mayor to re -order a social inquiry or send social inspectors to assess the situation. Random i nspections are usually carried out during the year, as a result of cross -checking files, complaints by different persons/institutions, or complaints by the territorial Court of Auditors. In 2020, 76% of all spot checks related to the three means -tested ben efits. Of the 22% of cases of legal infringement identified ( e.g.,  wrongful calculation of benefit level, discrepancies between social inquiry findings and the database on beneficiaries, missing information on files), almost 90% related to these three bene fits (see Table 10 in the Annex).  Thematic evaluations are conducted every few years, most recently in February 2021. This evaluation of the GMI benefit was the first to explore the employment opportunities for out -of-work GMI beneficiaries (see Table 9 i n the Annex). The evaluation resulted in the legislative proposal that became GEO 101/2021. One of the most important results of the evaluation was recognition that most of the fit -for-work GMI beneficiaries have a very low education level, disqualifying t hem from participating in any training or vocational programme, significantly reducing their chances of being offered a job, and making them ineligible for certification of any non -formally obtained vocational skills. In September 2021, GEO 101/2021 was ad opted to stimulate the completion of formal education for this segment of unemployed GMI recipients.  Fraud monitoring and right to appeal  Fraud assessment is part of the random assessments and cross -checks conducted by AJPISs, with data published as part of the ANPIS’ annual activity report. In 2020, for example, most of the cases of legal infringement identified related to beneficiaries’ falsely declarations of their real income level or assets. Some of the irregularities were the result of city hall fail ures, such as failing to conduct a social inquiry when needed/required, or to organize/report community working hours. Proven cases of wrongdoing are sanctioned through warnings or fines, or where they are the result of the conscious behaviour of the benef iciary, excessive payments are recouped by legal means.  Law No. 554/2005, on administrative disputes, gives b eneficiaries the right to appeal a decision of the AJPIS.  5 Impacts of MI schemes  The three means -tested schemes were significantly redesigned in 2 011 as part of social assistance reform. Amendments to the legislation aimed to (a) increase their targeting capacity and (b) reduce geographical variations arising from the discretionary power of local authorities with insufficient capacity to administer benefits properly. Since 2011, the GMI threshold level and FSA threshold/benefit level have been updated only once. The result of increasing the targeting without updating the thresholds was a sharp reduction in coverage and a serious deterioration in the Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  18  adequacy of benefits and their capacity to alleviate poverty. In 2016, new legislation was adopted that combined all three benefits into a single benefit, the MII. However, as integration of benefits requires a digitalised information system and effective community integrated social services, adoption of the law was postponed several times and is now expected to take effect in September 2023.  The design of the new MII benefit would successfully overcome some of the problems inherent in the current benefits  (e.g.,  overlapping eligibility testing procedures, loose links between local authorities and regional/county employment offices). If the 2016 law is not amended, however, the design of the MII will continue to perpetuate three significant challenges faced  by the current benefit systems: (a) weak integration of social inclusion and employment/activation services, (b) punitive rather than enabling nature of the benefit system, and (c) ineffectiveness of these benefits in addressing poverty.  Current benefits  are designed to penali se low -income/poor people  who are not working , as they presume a lack of willingness to work among  this vulnerable segment (Cernea & Vasile, 2018) . Work and employment -stimulating measures embedded in the GMI scheme are designed to punish rather than to promote social and labour market inclusion. First ly, in the absence of an appropriate legal framework, community work  has proved overly complicated for local authorities,  which have a low capacity to enforce community work activities . In addition, they face the problem of organi sing work activities without certainty about who will show up for work, as most beneficiaries have to carry out a very small number of hours of com munity work ( the result of a large discrepancy between the steadily increasing national minimum salary and the frozen GMI eligibility threshold). The pitfalls of the current community work  requirement  result in an increased number of contraventions  that ar e subject to administrative sanctions. Most of these contraventions target local authorities failing to provide an effective community work plan for beneficiaries. The social integration dimension of the community work system is miss ed entirely .  Secondly,  as employment program mes revolve around mediation/information/counselling services and benefits for those taking up employment or for employers hiring unemployed  people , the y have been highly ineffective in targeting the most vulnerable groups. An evaluat ion from February 2021  found that most unemployed GMI beneficiaries have little if any education and a weak work history, putting them i n the category of those with the highest degree of unemployability  (Ministerul Muncii și Protecț iei Sociale , ANPIS/AJPIS, ANOFM/AJOFM, 2021) . Unfortunately, no systematic (publicly available) data are available on the GMI unemployed  under the guidance and responsibility of county -level employment offices. In 2021 , a first thematic report on this s ection of the population  was released by the ANPIS, but the type of data provided by the report shows a lack of experience in evaluating and monitoring employment/activation programmes. Nevertheless, the report’s conclusions and recommendations were used t o amend the legislation on employment stimulation measures for GMI beneficiaries. Since September 2021 , GMI beneficiaries without a lower secondary education must be referred to a Second Chance programme , and e mployment offices must cooperate with school inspectorates to make these programmes available. For their part, GMI beneficiaries cannot refuse  to take part in the Second Chance programme, if transportation is provided, without losing their benefits.  Third ly, programmes aimed at stimulating employment (by rewarding employment or subsidising work) but without a strong emphasis on increasing employability, will remain ineffective. Many measures for stimulating employment have been adopted since 2016 but their  effectiveness remains low, and very long -term unemployment becomes increasingly prevalent among the long -term unemployed.  Another important challenge faced by the GMI system is the lack of integration of employment with social assistance programmes. Soci al inclusion is the result of joint Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  19  programmes that tackle a multidimensional phenomenon. The lack of administrative and financial capacity within most local authorities (except in big cities) leads to under -developed community -level social assistance serv ices and a lack of coordination between the services meant to increase access to all basic services, including education. While the Law on MII does not emphasise the need for an integrated approach, the piloted community integrated services could be a key solution, provided the current legislation is amended to reflect a shift towards an integrated approach.  Finally, adequacy is a crucial problem. Means -tested benefits are currently decoupled from any form of labour market -related income (minimum pension, m inimum wage), compromising their effectiveness. During the last seven years, the minimum wage increased by 200%, and the minimum pension doubled, yet the eligibility thresholds for all means -tested benefits remained unchanged. In 2021, Law No. 225/2021 was  adopted, stipulating annual adjustment of the SRI in line with inflation. The SRI is part of the legislative framework on unemployment and social protection of unemployed but has not been updated since 2008. As most social benefits - or eligibility thresh olds for benefits - are expressed in terms of the SRI, updating of benefit levels has been sporadic and discretionary, and executed by a change in the formula linked to the SRI.   As yet, the Romanian Government does not have any indicators in place to mea sure the impact of the GMI or other means -tested benefits on poverty. Data show that poverty, especially among families with children, has increased since 2011 and peaked during 2014 -2015. While there are no recent evaluations to measure the effectiveness of these benefits, the risk of poverty, especially among children, is extremely sensitive to increases in social benefits.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying stre ngths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  20  6 