Links with labour market activation  In general, more than half of AMN recipients are registered at labour offices as job -seekers (on average, 60% in 2020). As job -seekers, they benefit from active labour market policy measures, including counselling and help with job -search. However, participation in activation w orks programmes, which is a precondition for claiming the activation allowance, is the most frequent form of their activation. It represents the main way to supplement the low amount of the material needs benefit. 4 Activation programmes are organised by m unicipalities or self -governing regions, but the selection of AMN recipients for participation is carried out by the labour offices. AMN recipients who claim the activation allowance must be registered at labour offices as job-seekers.   Activation work is  not carried out based on a standard labour relationship. The participants are not subject to the minimum wage law, and the organisers are not obliged to pay social insurance contributions for them.   Although the aim is to maintain working habits and increase employability, the ability to do so is rather limited. One of the reasons is that there is a lack of focus on upgrading skills – the ability to improve the labour market chances of participants is  quite low. (Value for Money, 2020).  An emphasis on activation in the form of the activation allowance 5 is accompanied by the fact that activation is embedded directly in the heart of the AMN scheme: into the material needs benefit. As mentioned in the p revious section, provision of the material needs benefit is conditional upon participation in activation works6. Refusal to take part in activation works leads to a reduction in the basic benefit (which is already very low). These two effects strengthen s ignificantly the activation bias of the AMN scheme.  The special allowance  represents another activation measure. It is aimed at supporting the transition from long -term unemployment to employment. It is granted to those who were long -term unemployed and/o r recipients of AMN and who have found a job.  The special allowance is granted for 18 months: €126.14 per month during the first 12 months, €63.07 per month during the next six months. The allowance tops up wages to twice the minimum wage. Of great import ance is that this special allowance is now also provided to those living in households relying on assistance in material need (AMN) minimum income. ( Previously, entitlement to the special allowance was not compatible with the receipt of assistance in materi al need  by the household.)  According to the spending review carried out by the Value for Money unit at the Ministry of Finance, the special allowance does not reach its goal and has limited effects: as many as 78% of recipients who were long -term unemploye d end up back  4 In September 2021, 21,791 recipients of the material needs benefit also received the  activation allowance. It represented 31.7% of all recipients. In September 2020, the proportion was 37.3%.  5 The activation allowance plays an important role, as its amount represents a significant percentage of the material needs benefit.  6 A person mus t work f or at least 64 hours per week. If s/he refuses to work for at least 64 hours, he may work for at least 32 hours, which is the condition for benefit in material need . t The condition is not monitored during the  two months after the start of receiving assistance in material need.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  on the jobseeker  register within 18 months from when they started receiving the allowance (Value for Money, 2020).  2 