Summary  Minimum income support in Slovakia is provided through the ‘assistance in material need’ (AMN) scheme. This non -contributory, means -tested scheme is organised at central state level. However, municipalities also play an important role . They provide one -off benefits and counselling. One -off benefits, funded from th e municipality budget, can take the form of cash or an in -kind benefit. Municipalities also organise activation programmes which allow recipients of AMN to cumulate the activation allowance with the basic amount of the material needs benefit.  AMN consists of one main benefit (the material needs benefit) and four allowances: the activation allowance, the protection allowance, the dependent children allowance, and the housing allowance. To be eligible for allowances, claimants must meet various criteria.  To b e entitled to AMN, households must have incomes below the subsistence minimum threshold, which varies according to household composition. Provision of the material needs benefit is also conditional on participation in a public works scheme. The total amoun t of the benefit for a given type of household is reduced by € 68.8  for each adult who does not take part in any of the activities defined by the law for at least 32 hours per month. This obligation to work in order to receive the benefit does not apply , for example,  to people who are not able to work or who are involved in other types of activity, including for example education (on a daily basis), resocialisation, caring for a disabled person .The list of the exemptions is, however, longer (see relevant sec tion).  The AMN scheme suffers from several weaknesses in terms of coverage. As regards the material needs benefit, its provision is conditional on participation in a public works scheme. There are also problems with access to the housing allowance and the  dependent child allowance.  When it comes to adequacy, the AMN scheme provides a very low income – far below the poverty line, and below any acceptable standard of living. The amounts of the basic benefit and allowances were set in the early 2000s as a par t of a radical socio -political reform, with the emphasis on activation. The adequacy or otherwise of minimum income protection has not attracted the attention of policy -makers.  Small community work programmes represent the most frequently used activation measure. Activation schemes are organised by the municipalities or self -governing regions. The selection of AMN recipients for activation schemes is carried out by local labour offices. Recipients who claim the activation allowance must be registered at a labour office as job -seekers.  The special allowance, which is not formally part of AMN, represents another activation measure. It is aimed at supporting the transition of long -term unemployed people into the labour market. It is granted to those who were long -term unemployed or recipients of AMN and who have found a job.  The  overall impact of the minimum income scheme in Slovakia is very limited – both in terms of adequacy and activation. It does not fulfil the main objective of the scheme. When it comes t o adequacy, low sums combined with a long -term lack of indexation result into poor support for poor people. In terms of activation, the existing analyses show that it has failed systematically.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting benefici aries to find work.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted .  1 