Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  There is a programme that is intended to address  the needs of children at risk of poverty or social exclusion. In the early 2000s, as part of the radical welfare state reform, Slovakia introduced state subsidies for school meals for poor children in order to compensate for cuts in family and social benefits. As a result, poor children could benefit from free school lunches. The measure was targeted at children in low -income households (i.e. households receiving AMN  protection or with incomes at or below the level of the official subsistence mi nimum ). In addition, it also covered all children in schools where at least 50% of the children were children from households receiving AMN . From 2019, the coverage of school meal subsidies was significantly extended . From January 2019, the coverage was ex tended to all children in the preparatory class in preschool facilities (kindergartens) and f rom September 2019  all children in primary schools were included .  The reasoning behind the shift towards more universal provision was that this removes social bar riers among children and avoids stigmatising poor children; it also improves children’s eating habits, and parents’ financial situation.7 In July 2020, the new government, formed after the March 2020 general election, announced that  near -universal  school meal subsidies would be withdrawn and replaced by increased child tax credits, while at the same time maintaining state subsidies for low -income children. The aim was to make more effective use of the public budget, through better targeting. Furthermore, a n increase in the level of child tax credits was seen as a step supporting parents’ freedom of choice on how to spend their income. These changes were adopted in 2021 , including increase in the amount of the subsidy.  Some commentators pointed to the fact that targeting public support at the most vulnerable is a standard social policy solution. However, in the case of school meal subsidies it did not work. In 2018, when low -income households benefited from the subsidies, subsidised school meals were provide d on average to 48,518 pupils in primary schools each month (i.e. 11% of all pupils in primary schools, and 49% of primary school pupils at risk of poverty or social exclusion), measured according to the EU definition (Value for Money Unit, 2020). In the c ase of kindergartens, subsidised meals were provided on average to 5,036 children each month (i.e. 3.1% of all children in kindergartens, and 30% of children in kindergartens who were at risk of poverty or social exclusion). This means that, despite target ing the most vulnerable, there was a gap in the coverage.  Furthermore, replacing school meal subsidies for non -poor households by increased child tax credits broadens the range of choice, but undermines a cohesive social climate, pitting members of the low er-middle classes, who do not receive the subsidies, against the most vulnerable groups in society.  Apart from school meal subsidies, subsidies are provided for school supplies for poor children. It is provided to children who live in households receiving AMN or whose incomes are below the subsistence minimum. In addition, it is also provided to all  7 Extension of the coverage resulted in an increased number of children claiming school lunches. According to COLSAF statistics, school meal subsidies were paid for 501,587 children in May 2020, compared with 100,464 children in May 2019. A  survey carried out by the Ministry of Education (cited by a Slovak newspaper) showed that after extending the coverage of school meal subsidies, the number of children covered by school lunches increa sed by one quarter in the first half of the school year 2019/2020. The highest increase was observed among households with three or more children.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  children in school classes where at least 50% of children come from households receiving AMN.  In 2020, free -of-charge debt counselling was launched by the stat e administration – in the form of a national project funded by  the EU ( Human Resources Operational Programme, priority axes 8, REACT -EU). Up to 2020, debt counselling had been provided mainly by NGOs. Its provision is crucial because debts represent a stro ng barrier to entering the labour market.8 However, the risk is that debt counselling is provided only on the basis of the project, which relies on EU funds. Therefore, steps should be taken in order to ensure its sustainability in the future.  3 