Links with labour market activation  At the end of December 2020, there were 38  148 unemployed CSA beneficiaries. Each was subject to activation requirements, as registration with the ESS is a condition of eligibility for CSA (see Section 1.1). They accounted for half (50.5%) of CSA beneficiaries aged 15 -656, and 43.7% of all registered unemployed (ESS, 2021a).  There are two kinds of individual action plans that an unemployed person signs at the ESS. The first is signed by all registered unemployed persons, while the second, a job integration agreement, is only signed by the long -term unemployed. The third kind of plan/agreement is an agreement on the active addressing of socia l problems, which is signed by temporarily unemployed persons at the SWC.  The first individual action plan must be prepared no later than 15 days from registration on the Unemployed Persons Register or the Jobseekers Register. It defines the appropriate em ployment for the person, the method of active job search, and other obligations. It also assesses whether an in -depth individual action plan should be drafted immediately, or no later than four months after the person’s registration. It only includes servi ces provided by the ESS and contractors of the MLFSAEO. Those receiving unemployment cash benefit, CSA or IS have priority participation in active labour market policies (ALMPs) (Labour Market Regulation Act, 2010).  All long -term unemployed, including CSA recipients deemed fit for work, get an individualised in -depth assessment within 12 -15 months of registration and a subsequent individual job integration agreement – individual action plan (no later than 18 months after registration). This evaluation (a so-called  in-depth assessment) of various aspects of the person’s situation includes aspects linked to social inclusion beyond integration in the labour market and services needed to improve their situation, including services provided by other institutions (SWCs, health institutions, etc.) – in sum, it sets out a planned path towards work.  The job integration agreement is always based on the in -depth assessment. It is technically similar to an individual action plan, which is clearly defined in the labour market legislation and is a written contract, signed by the ESS counsellor and the unemployed person. The job integration agreement must include at least one activity aimed at finding a job, the job search area, and employment goals. It also includes steps t hat need to be taken by the unemployed person, programmes to which they will be referred, other agreed activities based on their particular needs, the time schedule, reporting, frequency of contact, etc. Mutual responsibilities and clear provisions are als o defined. The job integration agreement combines relevant services provided by different organisations, covering a wider variety of more specific services, but not those social services whose provision is the responsibility of SWCs.  The job integration a greement is amended during each meeting with the employment counsellor, and its validity is limited to the period between two meetings with the counsellor. The counsellor and the unemployed person meet on average every three months. In -between, their conta ct is by email or telephone, as needed. The contact centre and e -Portal are also available.   6 Number of CSA beneficiaries as of 1 De cember 2020.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9   A CSA recipient failing to fulfil the obligations set out in the individual action plan is removed from the Unemployed Persons Register and denied the CSA.  The ESS  may cease to keep the person  in the Unemployed Persons Register if they:   Deregister from the Unemployed Persons Register or the Register of Persons included in the ALMP programme;   Refuse to join an ALMP or violates the obligations contained in the contract on inclusion in an ALMP;   Refuse an adequate or suitable job, or do not m ake an effort to obtain a job interview;   Work or are employed illegally;   Are not an active jobseeker, unless they are exempted from this obligation by the individual action plan;   Refuse to sign the individual action plan.  The ESS cease s to keep a person in the Jobseekers Register if they:   Deregister from the Jobseekers Register;   Do not report to the ESS even once within six months of registration (Labour Market Regulation Act, 2010) . If someone who is long -term unemployed is found to be temporarily unemploy able, they are moved from the Unemployed Persons Register to the Register of Temporarily Unemployable Persons and directed to the SWC . Some of them have been voluntarily referred to social activation, which began as a pilot project in 2017. In the case of those temporarily unemployable, employment offices currently cooperate with SWCs on the pilot project of social activation (see Section 3). Their cooperation in the provision of labour market services and ALMPs is obligatory and regulated by the Social Ass istance Payments Act, 2010 and subsequent amendments  and the Labour Market Regulation Act, 2010.  Activation support offered by the ESS includes:  1. Individual in -depth career counselling;  2. Workshops on life -long career orientation - provided by the ESS at its career centres;  3. ALMP measures;  4. Employment rehabilitation services (for the disabled).  SWCs offer personal social services, such as emergency assistance, personal assistance, family help, institutional care, guidance, assistance and employment under special conditions, and assistance to workers employed in companies, institutions and with other employers. Social activation services are not listed among the personal social services because they remain a pilot project. Inclusion in a social activation programme is not obligatory and non -take -up does not have any consequences for CSA eligibility.  A great majority  of persons  included in the social activation program mes  receive CSA ; only a few do not. In accordance with the law, CSA beneficiaries are a prio rity group for inclusion in all ALMP programmes  (Labour Market Regulation Act, 2010) . For personalised services, they are treated in the same way as other (long -term) unemployed.  In 2020, 6  941 CSA beneficiaries were included in ALMP programmes, represent ing 33.3% of those included. Most CSA beneficiaries are involved in the job creation measure (in the public works programmes and the Learning Workshops programme), which target social inclusion. The share of CSA beneficiaries in public works was 58.1%, and  56.6% in the Learning Workshops programme.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  The ESS collects data on CSA beneficiaries included in ALMPs. These data are not published on the ESS website but  are available on request. The ESS does not keep data on the waiting times for taking up ALMPs.  The  average caseload in Slovenia is 267 unemployed people per counsellor7. This number refers to all clients, irrespective of whether or not they are CSA beneficiaries, as there is no special category of counsellors solely supporting CSA beneficiaries. They are always mixed with other unemployed persons within a certain category, such as long -term unemployed, migrants, unemployed with disabilities, young people, etc.  The caseloads of different types of counsellors vary greatly (from 50 -450 unemployed people p er counsellor), depending on the type of counselling provided (case manager, basic counselling, in -depth counselling, rehabilitation counselling, counselling for migrants, young people, etc.).  The financial situation of the CSA beneficiaries changes when t hey start work. The means test for the CSA allows for partial exclusion of income from casual or occasional work (see Section 1.1). A possible decrease in unemployment benefit also has an impact, as the trigger point for unemployment benefit tapering is in come from work exceeding EUR 200 per month (net of social contributions and taxes) (Labour Market Regulation Act, 2010). In the case of income from work exceeding EUR 200 per month (net of social contributions and taxes), the unemployment benefit is decrea sed by 50% of income from work in excess of EUR 200 (net) per month. If the person is supporting minor children, for each child, the unemployment benefit is increased by 10% of the full amount of benefit (i.e. if there were no income from work), but not more than the full amount of unemployment benefit. Unemployment benefit is not cut if it would be reduced by less than EUR 20 (per month).  An activity allowance of EUR 80 cent per hour and compensation for travel and postage may be provided to cover all or part of the costs incurred for job search and integration into the service. The activity allowance depends on the duration of the person's inclusion in the service and is counted as income for the purposes of the CSA.   There has been no assessment of acti vation services for CSA beneficiaries specifically, as ESS evaluations include all participants. For instance, of all persons included in  the ALMP education and training programmes in 2018, 63% got a job. The highest labour market inclusion rates were for those included in work trials (88%), certification of national professional qualifications (75%), workplace training (73%), and informal education programmes (59%). The lowest inclusion rates (relative to their share of total unemployment) were for lon g-term unemployed, CSA beneficiaries, and persons older than 55 (ESS, 2019).  An evaluation of selected ALMPs found that on -the-job training was both efficient and effective (Burger et al ., 2017). Training and education of the employed was found to have a p ositive (short -term) impact, while training and education of the unemployed showed positive and statistically significant long -term effects ( Kavkler , 2012). The ‘Employ.me’ programme proved effective, although relatively expensive (Burger et al ., 2017). In stitutional training and public works were also evaluated as having a positive impact on the probability of getting a job.  3 