Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  Assessment of social needs by a social worker  at the SW C may start as soon as the person is granted CSA (it is conditional on registration with the ESS).  In practice, due to the lack of staff, social workers at SWCs assess social needs of selected CSA beneficiaries (people with complex and diverse barriers, di fficult personal circumstances that hinder their integration into the labour market) at both individual  7 Information collected through consultation with  Brigita Vončina, ESS,  on 31 October 2021.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  and household level. The beneficiary is invited to the SWC to discuss their problems with the coordinator, who then outlines the personal social service s available (emergency assistance, personal assistance, family help, institutional care, guidance, assistance and employment under special conditions, and assistance to workers employed in companies, institutions and with other employers). The beneficiary may voluntarily choose the service(s). Their health status is not evaluated at that time, because the SWC is not competent in this area and because of data protection. Instead, the coordinator makes a written comment on possible health problems.  In the ca se of temporarily unemployable persons, SWCs and the ESS (and its local employment offices) are legally obliged to cooperate on the provision of labour market services and ALMPs  (Social Assistance Payments Act, 2010 , and subsequent amendments  and the Labo ur Market Regulation Act, 2010). Employment offices and the SWCs are the single -entry points for social activation programmes.  A multi -sectoral assessment of social needs (and subsequent labour  market activation) is carried out by interinstitutional commi ttees (12 -15 months after registration with the ESS) for long -term unemployed CSA beneficiaries found to be temporarily unemployable (see Section 2). The Labour Market Regulation Act (2010) and the Social Assistance Payments Act ( 2010  and subsequent amendm ents ) set out the procedure for establishing the temporary unemployability of unemployed persons . An unemployed person who is presumed to have problems with addiction, mental health, major social problems or similar problems that might hinder their employm ent is referred to a special interinstitutional committee to resolve those circumstances. The proposal for such referral is submitted by an employment counsellor at the local employment office. The committee has at least three members: a career (employment ) counsellor, a social worker and a rehabilitation counsellor, with other experts involved as needed. The committee assess the reasons for temporary unemployment and, within 30 days, proposes possible measures and activities to improve employment opportuni ties, and notifies the SWC accordingly. If necessary, the committee may first obtain an opinion from an occupational health doctor. The SWC then concludes an agreement on the active addressing of social problems (integration into psychosocial rehabilitatio n, medical treatment, etc.) with the individual. The agreement sets out possible solutions to actively resolve their social problems (inclusion in psychosocial rehabilitation, specific treatments,  etc.), and the activities they need to carry out.  The benef iciary may choose from among the following personal social services: emergency assistance, personal social assistance, family help, institutional care, guidance, assistance and employment under special conditions, assistance to workers employed in companie s, institutions and with other employers , or public/non -governmental social programmes ( for example addiction treatment) and social activation programmes . The most frequently used personal social services are emergency assistance and personal social assist ance, but most CSA beneficiaries do not choose any service. Those who opt for inclusion in social activation  or another social protection program me choose one of them . The choice also depends on the availability of services across municipalities.  Social activation services remain at pilot stage and are focused on the long -term unemployed  and the CSA beneficiaries , but users also include inactive  persons  as well as women from other cultural backgrounds  and Roma women  (both with a per manent residence permit or permanent residence in Slovenia ). They include counselling by social worke rs at the SWC s and programmes offered by external providers – non -profit organi sations − to improve social , functional  and working  skills. There is also a possibility to arrange a work activity under the mentorship/supervision of an employer. A beneficiary may choose to participate in one of the programmes at the Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  nearest of the 52 locations. The contact person at the SWC has 10 -12 clients8, while the social  activation coordinator employed by the MLFSAEO has 20 -25 clients9. Between autumn 2017 and autumn 2019, 1  921 people were included into social activation programmes, of which 677 concluded their social activation while 774 terminated the contract (Resolu tion on the national social assistance programme 2022 -2030, 2022). More than a quarter of included people (28.6%) either got a job, or were included into training and education programmes or the ESS qualification programmes, or re -entered the Unemployed Pe rsons Register.  While social activation remains a pilot project, the agreement does not impose obligations or consequences on the beneficiary in respect of their CSA. Sanctions only follow if the ESS refers the potentially unemployable person to a presenta tion meeting at the SWC and the person does not attend. However, a sanctioned person may not register on the Unemployed Persons Register for six months after they have been deregistered, and only registered persons are eligible for CSA.  After the period se t out in the agreement, the SWC draws up an opinion on the social circumstances that impact the employability of the beneficiary, and notifies the beneficiary and the competent employment office accordingly. In the case of a positive opinion, the SWC infor ms the beneficiary of their right to re -register with the competent employment office.  The combined service package is not monitored because social activation remains a pilot project and has yet to be incorporated into the relevant acts. SWCs and the ESS monitor their own services. The MLFSAEO is responsible for this monitoring, but has no direct access to databases. The ESS reports to the MLFSAEO (Labour Market and Employment Directorate) periodically (monthly, quarterly, semi -annually or annually, dependi ng on the kind of data) on the implementation of the following labour market measures: labour market services, ALMPs, unemployment insurance, and ensuring rights from the compulsory and voluntary unemployment insurance. The MLFSAEO has delegated the monito ring of social services to the Social Protection Institute of the Republic of Slovenia (IRRSV).  In the third social activation evaluation report (as part of the ‘Development and Establishment of a Comprehensive Model of Social Activation’), Trbanc et al . (2019b) described users’ experiences and assessments of programmes, with positive experiences prevailing. While higher educated users were less satisfied, users generally were very satisfied with the work and cooperation of social activation coordinators.  In the fourth evaluation report, Trbanc et al . (2019c) set out the experiences and views of programme providers, social activation coordinators and contact persons at SWCs and employment offices on social activation, following the completion of the progra mmes selected in the first four public tenders. These were short (three months), intermediate (six months) and long (11 months) social activation programmes. Participants in long and intermediate programmes stated that certain activities or involvement in work had restored their sense of usefulness and inclusion. The programme helped them to set their own goals, which led some of them to conscientiously attend social activation programmes. They noted the individual approach as an important example of best p ractice, given the heterogeneity of participants. Programme providers found practical training to be a key element. Some emphasised the importance of considering the individual’s wishes and interests when selecting a suitable practice or place for later em ployment. They found that work  8 Information collected through consultation with  Simona Strnad,  Ljubljana SWC, Ljubljana Moste -Polje Office, on 19 October 2021.  9 Information collected through consultation with  Mateja Prosen, MLFSAEO, on 29 October 2021.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  boosted participants’ self -esteem and motivated them, especially if they see the direct effects of their work and recognise their role. The final report (Trbanc et al ., 2019a) focused on various aspects of the establishment a nd operation of the social activation system and social activation programmes, and on participants’ experiences.   4 