Summary  There are two main minimum income (MI) schemes available to the working -age population in Slovenia: cash social assistance (CSA) and income supplement (IS). Other important additional benefit  is emergency  financial social assistance. Those receiving CSA have a right  to payment of contributions for mandatory health care insurance and a right to covering the difference to full value of health care services . While CSA is primarily intended to provide last -resort short -term income support (several months), IS provides longer term financial support to cover the costs of living for those who cannot be expected to improve their social situation through their own efforts (permanently unemployable persons, those permanently incapable of work, and women o ver 63 years /man over 65 years , except those in full -time institutional care). Both benefits are means -tested. All unemployed CSA recipients are required to register in the Unemployed Persons Register with the Employment Service of Slovenia (ESS), except t hose included in the Register of Temporarily Unemployable Unemployed Persons. CSA and IS are granted by social work centres (SWCs), which act as one -stop shops for the delivery of means -tested cash social benefits, subsidies and some other payments from pu blic sources. The MI exceeds the national at -risk -of-poverty (AROP) threshold only in the case of a single -parent family with two or three children, and exceeds the extreme AROP threshold in all cases.1 In Slovenia , the guaranteed pension and net minimum wage are  also below AROP threshold. In 2021, the minimum income for a single -person household was lower than the net minimum wage  by 45%. CSA together with IS for a single person w as equivalent to 95% of the guaranteed pension  in 2021 . CSA can be granted s everal times in a row to CSA recipients without limit  if circumstances do not change . The CSA is determined based on the basic amount of minimum income (BAMI) and the equivalence scale.  The BAMI is indexed annually  on 1 March by the consumer price index (CPI) for the previous calendar year .  In accordance with the Labor Market Regulation Act  (2010) , CSA beneficiaries are the priority group for inclusion in all active labour market policies (ALMPs).  All long -term unemployed, including CSA recipients deemed fit for work, get an individualised in -depth multi -sectoral  assessment of social needs (and subsequent labour market activation) within 12 -15 months of their registration  in the Unemployed Persons Register . That forms the basis for their individual ‘job integration agreement – individual action plan’ (no later than 18 months after registration). If the long -term unemployed person is found to be unemployable, they are moved from the Unemployed Persons Register to the Register of Temporarily Unemployab le Persons and directed to the SWC . In the case of temporarily unemployable persons, the ESS (its local employment offices) and SWCs are legally obliged to cooperate .  If social activation is needed, the unemployed person concludes an individual ‘agreement  on the active addressing of social problems’ with the SWC. The pilot programme project of social activation was introduced in 2017  as a pilot social welfare service . It has been aiming at assisting the long -term unemployed  (LTU) and the CSA beneficiaries in their process of re -entering the labour market by providing them with empowerment and additional skills in the fields of IT literacy, functional and social competences, and practical work experiences. As long as the s ocial activation services remain a pilot project, the agreement on the active addressing of social problems is not binding on the beneficiary, nor does it carry any consequences regarding their entitlement to CSA.  Monitoring and evaluation of CSA and IS schem es is coordinated by the Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities (MLFSAEO) and carried out by  1 The 2021 BAMI is compared to the 2020 AROP based on the 2019 income.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  an external provider (Social Protection Institute of Slovenia, IRRSV) on a monthly basis. The appropriateness of the basic amount of mi nimum income (BAMI) must be checked every six years, most recently in 2017 (Stropnik et al ., 2017). The ESS periodically (monthly, quarterly, semi -annually or annually, depending on the kind of data) reports to the MLFSAEO  on the implementation of the foll owing labo ur market measures: labo ur market services,  active labour market policies, unemployment insurance, and ensuring rights from the compulsory and voluntary unemployment insurance.   No studies have examined the impact of MI schemes on the risk of pov erty. Assessments of the impact of labour market activation services on employment prospects have not looked specifically at MI beneficiaries. Nevertheless, the reduction of poverty is a political priority in Slovenia and is evident in the key aims and performance indicators of national strategic documents.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evi dence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 