Governance mechanisms  MI schemes are regulated and financed at national level by the MLFSAEO. Implementation is partly at national (ESS) and regional (SWC) level, but is primarily at local level10. In the case of temporarily unemployable persons , local units of SWCs and the ESS  (local employment offices) are legally obliged to cooperate on the provision of labour market services and ALMPs (including social activation) (Social Assistance Payments Act, 2010  and subsequent amendments ; Labour  Market Regulation Act, 2010). Local units of SWCs act as one -stop shops for the delivery of means -tested cash social benefits, subsidies and other payments from public sources. Their activities include social activation. Employment offices are in charge o f labour market activation and cooperation on social activation. ALMPs are also implemented by external contractors listed in the Register of External Contractors of ALMP Programme Activities (SBP, 2021; ESS, 2021b). There are public calls to register, and  any legal or physical person may apply (MLFSAEO, 2021f). Social activation programmes may be provided by any legal person fulfilling the conditions. Public tenders are published as needed. Current providers are organisations that predominantly implement e ducation, social protection or employment (e.g. ALMP) programmes, disability enterprises, and social enterprises (Trbanc et al. , 2019).  The MLFSAEO coordinates the monitoring of the CSA and IS schemes, with benefit indicators monitored by the IRRSV monthly . Key indicators include the number of recipients and beneficiaries, broken down by sex, age, activity status, month, and the amounts paid. The IRRSV is responsible for reviewing social benefits, personal social services and social activation programmes, a s outlined in its annual work programmes defined together with the MLFSAEO. There is a legal obligation to check the appropriateness of the BAMI every six years, most recently in 2017, which set the short -term minimum costs of living for a man aged 19 -65 a t EUR 441 .67 per month  and the long -term minimum costs of living for a man aged 19 -65 at EUR 613.41 per month  (Stropnik et al ., 2017). This was the basis for the revised (higher)11 amount of the BAMI (and thus higher amounts of cash social benefits).   The ESS is responsible for monthly monitoring of labour market activation, including the use of/participation in services/programmes by CSA beneficiaries. Key indicators of labour market integration include: 1) registered unemployed, by sex, age, education, duration of unemployment, month, CSA beneficiaries, disabled, unemployment benefit beneficiaries, inflow/exit, fulfilment of the active job search obligation, fulfilment of the obligation to accept the job, etc.; 2) individual ALMPs, by inflow/exit, sex, a ge, education, month, etc.; 3) number of persons deregistered for failing to fulfil their obligations, inflow into/exit from the Register of Temporarily Unemployable Unemployed Persons; 4) users of other services, their exit into employment, etc. The ESS, together with its local employment offices, uses the key indicators to monitor achievement of its goals. It assesses labour market activation and publishes regular reports (monthly, quarterly, semi -annually and annually).  The MLFSAEO is responsible for mon itoring social activation, which is carried out by the IRRSV (see Section 3). All services are monitored. Key indicators of personal social protection services include: number of programmes, financial sources, staff and  10 There are 16 regional SWCs and 62 local offices, 12 regional ESS offices and 58 local employment offices (ESS, 2021c), 211 organisations implementing ALMPs (ESS,  2021b), and 27 external providers of social activation programmes (MLFSAEO, 2021e).  11 BAMI (for a single adult) is based on the calculated minimum costs of living, although in recent years the BAMI fell short.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  number of users (by category), all b y kind of programme. Data on the number of social activation programmes, number of invited persons, number of included persons, number of exits (into education, ALMPs, etc.), number of positive exits (exits into employment), start and end of the project, a nd funds are also collected, all by duration of programme. Number of exits is the main indicator monitored, with a target of 25% exiting into employment, education or ALMPs. Internal evaluations of the social activation pilot project (particularly, coopera tion with SWCs) are carried out by the ESS. These evaluations have shown that the best results were achieved in activation of young people and those with low education12. The evaluation of selected ALMPs  is presented in Section 2.  The Social Assistance Pay ments Act ( 2010  and subsequent amendments ) stipulates that a new amount of the BAMI is to be determined if the gap to the amount of the newly and latest established short -term minimum cost of living exceeds 15%. It is up to the MLFSAEO to decide whether an d how the recommendations regarding social services are taken into account and implemented. There are no formal mechanisms in place to ensure that the evaluation recommendations on labour market activation are taken into account, but the executives/leaders hip of the ESS demand that the set objectives are achieved.  5 