Governance mechanisms  Provision of AMN and special allowance is the responsibility of the central government. More concretely, it is COLSAF that is responsible for provision of the benefits and allowances, for registering claimants, making decisions about the fulfilm ent of eligibility criteria, and checking the living conditions of recipients. COLSAF has a relatively dense network of local offices, with adequate geographical coverage. The responsibility of COLSAF and its offices is not limited to minimum income protec tion. They are engaged in the provision of other social benefits, public employment services, counselling and psychological services, and the protection of children. Within public employment services, labour offices provide a package of services – from fro nt-line services providing a first point of contact, through job -search support, to counselling and other services, including activation of assistance in material need recipients.  Relying on a centralised design, the delivery arrangements for minimum income benefits are the same across the country. The administration of benefit claims follows general rules defined by the Act on Administrative Procedure. Decisions by authorities can be reviewed by the courts.  Minimum income benefits are paid on a rights basis. There is a set of criteria which are applied strictly. They relate to an assessment of eligibility, decisions on the total amount of benefit, provision of allowances to benefit, and so on. This also holds true for the termination of benefit  payments. The Act on Assistance in Material Need lists the conditions under which benefit payments can be stopped.  At municipal level, one -off benefits and counselling are provided. One -off benefits, funded from the municipality budget, can take the form  of cash or in -kind benefits.  As stated in the previous sections, a main feature of the AMN scheme is its activation bias. In this context, municipalities play an important role, as they organise activation programmes which represent a dominant form of ac tivation for AMN recipients.  4 Impact of minimum income scheme  The minimum income scheme in Slovakia is a workfare scheme, with a strong emphasis on activation. The emphasis on activation takes two forms. First, it is reflected in the very low levels of the  material needs benefit, which serves as a basic benefit for poor people. Second, it takes the form of activation of AMN recipients and adult household members via the activation allowance, and the conditioning of the basic benefit on participation in publ ic works programmes.  The overall impact of the minimum income scheme on Slovakia is very limited – both in terms of adequacy and activation. When it comes to adequacy, low levels combined with a long -term lack of indexation result in inadequate support fo r those most in need. In terms of activation, the existing analyses show that it has failed systematically (Value for Money, 2020). However, the problems with activation do not  8 People in debt often face debt execution or seizure of personal property. If such people want to take a  job, they must take into account that they will receive only part of their future earnings.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  directly relate to the parameters of activation allowance itself (and thus to p arameters of the AMN scheme), but to the process of activation , embedded in the framework of employment services.   As regards the strengths of the scheme, two aspects can be mentioned. First, there are additional programmes for children in need, supportin g their eating habits and nutrition via contributions to school lunches, and supporting their participation in education via contributions to school equipment.  AMN has been the subject of several assessments. Most of them are qualitative in nature, focusi ng on poverty and social exclusion in marginalised Roma communities and on social work, financial management, or participation in activation programmes. The qualitative studies pointed to the fact that AMN does not cover basic living conditions, and that t here are difficulties when claiming the housing allowance. Quantitative assessments (Gerbery and Miklošovič, 2018 ; Value for Money, 2020) confirm its low level of effectiveness. In particular, a spending review of groups at risk of poverty and social exclu sion (Value for Money, 2020) was a very important and useful exercise, as it was based on administrative data and a very detailed review of each initiative and the related expenditure. In general, this quantitative assessment confirmed that the AMN scheme needs fundamental reform. The spending review report proposed various alternatives for revising AMN. For example, it proposed increasing AMN to reach the level of the subsistence minimum (while not taking the housing allowance into account), and for the al lowance for dependent children to cover all children from birth until completion of compulsory education. The report quantified various alternatives, while insisting that people’s motivation to work would not be reduced.   5 