Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  Minimum income support in Slovakia is provided through the ‘assistance in material need’ (AMN) scheme ( pomoc v hmotnej núdzi ). This non -contributory, means -tested scheme is organised at central state level, with benefits paid by the state administration. The Central Office of Labour, Social Affairs and Family (COLSAF) and its local offices represents the main authority in this area. Social departments in the local offices1 make decisions regarding the provision of AMN, check the conditions of claimants of the material needs benefit, provide counselling, and run the register of claimants and members of their households.  Before claiming AMN, claimants need to have exercised their rights to other benefits providing basic living support, such as alimony, compensation income for temporary incapacity, sickness insurance, pension insurance, and accident insurance.  Household co nsists of jointly assessed persons, which are  (a) the individual  (b) the spouse  (c) the spouse and the dependent child in the case of       1. a minor child living with them in the household       2. adult child  (d) adult parents and dependent children in th e case of       1. a minor child living with them in the household       2. adult child  (e) parents and dependent children under the age of 25 who have no income or have an income of less than half the monthly minimum wage,  (f) parents and children over the age of 25 who are preparing for a future occupation on a daily basis,  (g) minor parents who are not children under point (a); e), and dependent children living with them in the household,  h) natural persons according to letter b) to g), if they are provide d with assistance in a crisis life situation and housing  j) adult natural persons according to letter b) to f) if a rehabilitation program is implemented for them   The AMN scheme consists of one main benefit – the material needs benefit – and four possible  supplementary allowances: the activation allowance ( aktivačný príspevok ); the protection allowance ( ochranný príspevok ); the allowance for dependent children  1 Local offices consist of several departments which deal with social benefits, public employment services, child protection, etc.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  (príspevok pre nezaopatrené dieťa ); and the housing allowance ( príspevok na bývanie ). To be eligi ble for allowances, claimant must meet various additional criteria.  The  protection allowance  is provided to those who are not able to take part in activation due to their age, health condition, parental duties, or care responsibilities for disabled people:  there are three amounts of the allowance, depending on the reason for inability. The housing allowance  is intended to cover a part of housing costs. The  dependent child allowance  is aimed at supporting the upbringing, education and development of children  with regular school attendance.  The activation allowance  is intended to support the acquisition, maintenance and development of knowledge, skills, practical experience, and working habits. Provision of the activation allowance is conditional on participat ion in eligible activities, which include: participation in education (in secondary school or university); and preparation for the labour market, such as activation work in the form of small community services for the municipality or for the self -governed region, or in the form of voluntary activities. The activation allowance is also provided to persons with income from dependent activity which does not exceed a minimum wage.  Minimum income levels were set at the beginning of the 2000s as a part of wider social policy reforms in Slovakia. The stated rationale of the new minimum income support system was to reduce dependency on social transfers and to strengthen incentives to look for a job. As result, very low levels of benefit were set, accompanied by sev eral conditional allowances, the levels of which were also low. Arguments for new amounts of the benefits and allowances or detailed calculations were never published.  In 2020, total expenditure on AMN amounted to €114 million (Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs and Family, 2021). Between 2019 and 2020, total expenditure increased by 1.5% due to the increased level of AMN. There have been significant changes over the last five years. In particular, the reform adopted in 2019 has brought several important c hanges. In 2019, a regular indexation mechanism was introduced.  The amounts of assistance in material need are adjusted (increased) on 1 January. Since 2019, two levels of activation allowance are provided with the aim of strengthening incentives to enter the labour market. The upper allowance was increased to € 140.8  per month and is granted to people who live in households receiving material needs assistance and who work. The lower level was €70.4  per month for any other eligible person who does not work.2 Finally, the April 2019 reform modified the eligibility conditions with regard to household composition and relationships between household members, in order to facilitate access to the assistance.  In 2020, school meal subsidies for all children were ca ncelled, and were reserved to more strictly defined category of  children  (see section 3)  – with the aim of making more effective use of the public budget through better targeting.  The AMN scheme was partly amended in response to the COVID -19 crisis . Rules  for acti vation allowance were relaxed in response to the barriers to the  performance of activities , which  represent conditions for activation allowance  (for example, activation works) . If a member of  household receiving assistance in material need could n ot perform activities3, which are necessary for being entitled to activation allowance, s/he is entitled to protective allowance. In addition , in 2020, a new social transfer – SOS subsidy – was introduced in order to provide support to people who found th emselves without an income during the pandemic. The subsidy is intended for those who ceased to perform a job or run a business during the pandemic and found themselves without  2 These amounts have been valid in 2021 and the beginning of 2022 (see Sumy dávky a príspe vkov od 01.01.2022 > ÚPSVaR (gov.sk) . 3 Barriers include obstacles faced by the organizer of the activities as well as quarantine measures or isolation due to COVID -19.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  any income and without entitlement to any other benefits. This type of income s upport has supplemented the existing minimum income scheme. Minimum income support is also provided at municipal level in the form of one -off benefits and counselling. One -off benefits, funded from the municipality budget, can take the form of cash or an i n-kind benefit. They are intended to cover part of the extraordinary expenses of households receiving minimum income support, including extraordinary healthcare expenses, expenditure related to the school attendance of children, or the purchase of necessar y household equipment (e.g. beds, table, chairs, refrigerator). Decision on the provision of one -off benefits are the responsibility of the municipality where the claimant has a permanent residence. One -off benefits and AMN are not mutually exclusive – they can be provided at the same time.  1.1  Eligibility  To be entitled to material needs assistance, households’ incomes must be below the subsistence minimum ( životné minimum ) threshold, which varies according to household composition. The subsistence minimum used to determine the situation of material need is calculated by attributing notional amounts to each household member:   the first adult, €218.06 per month;   every additio nal adult, €152.12 per month;   dependent child, €99.56 per month.  Income is defined in net terms after deducting taxes and social contributions. It is not reduced by any basic costs (e.g. rent, interest paid on mortgages and other loans, energy costs and ot her housing costs). It is measured over the month in which the application is submitted. However, some types of benefits are not taken into account when assessing entitlement to AMN. All income is taken into account with the exception of those listed below :  25% of  net earnings from employment;   50% of  net earnings from employment if the special allowance ( osobitný príspevok ) is provided;   25% of old-age or early pension  (this proportion is increased by 1% for each additional year of pensions insurance above 2 5 years of pension insurance);   25% of maternity benefit ( materské );  25% of invalidity pension, social pension awarded on account of invalidity, orphan’s pension, widow's and widower's pension if the widow or widower has reached retirement age;   child benefi t (prídavok na dieťa ) and supplement to child benefit ( príplatok k prídavku na dieťa );  child tax credit ( daňový bonus );  one -off state social benefits;   scholarships;   income of secondary school pupils and university students studying full -time up to 3-times the amount of subsistence minimum for an adult person;    financial contributions provided on the basis of participation in projects or programs supporting employment in the labour market in total up to 75% of the amount of the subsistence minimum fo r one adult natural person;    Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5   25% of the activation allowance for voluntary service ( príspevok na aktivačnú činnosť formou dobrovoľníckej služby );  special allowance;   childcare allowance ( príspevok na starostlivosť o dieťa );  subsidies to support humanitarian  assistance and subsidies from other authorities to address particularly critical living situations;   emergency municipality financial aid; and   earnings of students, not exceeding three times the subsistence minimum in the previous 12 months before the clai m. Real property and movable assets are taken into account in the means test. Recipients of material needs assistance can be asked to sell or rent out properties and assets except:   the house which they use as a permanent residence, and land which they use for personal purposes;   movable assets that are part of necessary household equipment;   a car used for the transport of a disabled person  or which has a value lower than 35 times the subsistence minimum (€7, 632 .6); or  a car older than 10 years.  The value of assets is based on a self -declaration by the recipient, which is then assessed by the competent authorities.  The assessment of assets is made for all family members sharing the same household. Assets which belong to all members of the household are included in the calculation. Recipients have an obligation to report to COLSAF any changes in their circumstances within eight days.  Furtherm ore, claimants must be with legal residence or permission to stay in Slovakia. AMN is also provided to those who were granted international protection status and are authorised to stay in the Slovak Republic.  Provision of the material needs benefit is als o conditional on participation in a public works scheme. The total amount of monthly benefit for a given type of household is reduced by €6 8.8 for each adult who does not take part in any of the activities defined by the law for at least 32 hours per month . This obligation to work in order to receive the benefit does not apply to those unable to work or who are involved in other types of activity (e.g. education, and improving their qualifications).  In order to be entitled to the allowances, various additio nal requirements have to be met. The following categories of AMN recipients have entitlement to the protection allowance  at the level of € 70.4 per month :  people who have reached pensionable age;   people who receive early old -age pension;   people with disabil ities;   lone parents with a child or children aged up to 31 weeks;   people who care for a disabled dependent person; and   people who participate in resocialisation programmes.  Protection allowance at level of  €38.8 per month is provided to member of household  who:  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  •  has unfavourable health status lasting for more than 30 continuous days, which is established by the relevant attending physician or  •  is a pregnant woman from the beginning of the eighth week before the expected date of childbirth designated by a d octor.  Protection allowance a€ the level of € 15.1 per month is provided to the member of household who:  •  is a pregnant woman from the start of the fourth month of pregnancy  •  is a parent who personally and full -time cares for a child under one year of age .   To be entitled to the housing allowance, recipients must be the owner or tenant of the dwelling. The allowance is also provided to those living in facilities where various  forms of services are provided (including older people’s homes, social services facilities, and emergency housing facilities).  The activation allowance is provided to people registered at labour offices who:   take part in education in order to complete lower secondary education;   increase their qualifications through external forms of study at secondary school or at university;   take part in activation work in the form of small projects for a municipality or self-governed region on the basis of t he Act on Employment Services 5/2004; or   carry out small municipal work for 64 -80 hours per month, based on the agreement between the labour office and municipality or between the labour office and a voluntary work organiser.  Further,  activation allowanc e is also granted to those receiving parental benefit and studying at secondary school or un iversity.  The application form for AMN has to be sent to the local Office of Labour, Social Affairs and Family ( Úrad práce, sociálnych vecí a rodiny – OLSAF ) accord ing to the place of residence of the applicant.  Applicants have a right of appeal. Recipients must report to OLSAF any changes in their circumstances within eight days.  Eligibility criteria were established at the beginning of the millennium, when the AMN  scheme was introduced (from 2004). Since then, some criteria have changed, and some added. However, there are no published or officially accessible documents that would indicate how eligibility criteria were chosen.  NGOs that work with people in poverty h ave repeatedly emphasised that:   the level of the subsistence minimum, which serves as a benchmark for assessing income, is too low and does not reflect real living costs; and   the design of the subsistence minimum has remained unchanged for a long time (des pite calls for its redesign).  1.2  Coverage  In September 2021, there were 58,718 households receiving AMN in Slovakia (Table 1). Between September 2020 and 2021, the number of recipients fell by 6.2%. In September 2021, AMN was provided to 138,156 people in tot al, representing 2.3% of the total population in Slovakia. Single -adult households represent the most frequent Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  type of household benefiting from the AMN scheme. Households composed of two adults and two children are the second most frequent household type.   Table 1.   Recipients of AMN and share of total population receiving AMN   September 2019  September 2020  September 2021  Number of recipients and number of all population on minimum income  Number of recipients  of AMN  61,005  62,654  58,718  Total number of beneficiaries  (incl. member of households)  138 002  138,156  125,655  Number of all people relying on AMN as % of total population  2.53  2.53  2.3  Number of recipients – breakdown by type of household  Single -adult household  33,4 62 35,388  34,118  One parent plus 1 -4 children  7,902 7,826  7,067  One parent plus 5 or more children  300  296  242  Couple without children  5,102  5,093  4,839  Couple plus 1 -4 children  11,30 5 11,339  10,081  Couple plus 5 or more children  2,93 4 2,712  2,371  Source: Central Office of Labour, Social Affairs and Family, Slovakia.  The AMN scheme suffers from several weaknesses in terms of coverage.  As regards the material needs benefit, its provision is conditional on participation in a public works scheme. However, the limited capacity of municipalities to create such schemes may hamper access by recipients (Value for Money, 2020).   The shortage of activation programmes also affects access to the activation allowance, which for many AMN recipients represents the only way of supplementing the low level of material needs benefit. The allowance is only provided to 1 in 2 AMN recipients (Value for Money, 2020). In addition, the coverage of job -seekers in the AMN system by activation allowance  varies substantially across municipalities (Value for Money, 2020).  The dependent child allowance, which is provided within the AMN scheme, is only available to households with children in compulsory education. This means that households with younger chil dren are not eligible. The well -known  benefits of investment in early education are ignored under this design.  The coverage of the housing allowance is also limited due to eligibility conditions. The housing allowance is provided to owners or tenants, peo ple living in facilities providing social services on a year -long residential basis, and also households living in an apartment or house based on a right of residence. Claimants must regularly pay housing costs; and in cases where they have arrears, they m ust declare that they have a repayment schedule. This may represent a problem for households living in marginalised Roma communities (who might not know how to declare the official status of their dwellings and might not be well informed about the applicat ion process) Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  or for households who face problems with household costs and related debts (Škobla et al., 2016).  There are no available statistics, survey data or estimates regarding non -take -up of the material needs benefit and related allowances, with a fe w exceptions. The take -up rate of the housing allowance is low. In 2020, only 46% of all households receiving AMN received the housing allowance. The dependent child allowance was granted to 90% of children living in households receiving AMN in 2020. There  has been no action taken by the government, regions or municipalities to increase take -up.  1.3  Adequacy  The level of AMN is set on the basis of household composition. Households are defined as adults living alone, or adults and children living together as pa rt of the same family (i.e. spouses, dependent children, parents). The amount of AMN that is granted to households is calculated as the difference between the sum of all entitlements within the AMN scheme  and income .  As of September 202 2, there are six le vels of material needs benefit, depending on the composition of household:   €68.8 per month for a single adult ;  €130.9  per month for a single adult with 1 -4 children ;  €11 9.6 per month for a couple without children ;  €17 9.0 per month for a couple with 1 -4 ch ildren ;  €191.2  per month for a single adult with more than 4 children ;  €241.3  per month for a couple with more than 4 children.  As regards the protection allowance , there are three amounts, depending on the reason for inability to participate in activation  measures:  €70.4  per month for those unable to take part due to age, disability, parental duties or care responsibilities ;  €38. 7 per month for those with ill -health lasting for more than 30 days ; €15.1 per month for parents caring for children under 1 and  pregnant women regularly attending preventive medical examinations.  The housing allowance  is provided to single -adult households (€5 9.40 per month) and households with two or more members (€9 4.8 per month).  The dependent child allowance  is paid at the l evel of €19 .3 per month.  The activation allowance  is provided at two levels. An allowance amounting to €1 40.8 per month is granted to people who live in households receiving AMN and who work  who and has earned income of at least  the minimum monthly wage . An allowance of €70.4  is provided to others who are eligible but who do not work or take part in the activation measures  (who is registered at labour offices and  take part in the activation measures or receiving parental benefit and studying at secondary school or university).   An important point is that the total sum of AMN granted to the claimant and their household is calculated as the difference between all entitlements and the disposable income of the household.  The adequac y of the material needs benefit is indicated in Table 2, which takes account only of the basic material needs benefit, without allowances. The reason for this is that receipt of the allowances requires fulfilment of various conditions that may Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  differ from household to household. On the other hand, child benefit is taken into account (part B in Table 2), as it is a universal social transfer provided to each child, without any conditions.  Table 2.  Adequacy of material needs benefit  Type of household  Single adult  Couple with 2 children  A. Monthly amount of material needs benefit  €67.80  €176.40  % of the at -risk -of-poverty threshold for given type of household (threshold for the year 2020)  15.6  19.3  % of the extreme at -risk -of-poverty threshold for given type of household (threshold for the year 2020)  Not available  Not available  % of gross average wage of single earner (in 2020)  5.9 15.6  % of gross minimum wage of single earner (in 2020)  11.7  30.4  B. Material needs benefit plus child benefit (€25.50 per child per month)  Not applicable  €227.40  % of the at -risk -of-poverty threshold for given type of household  Not applicable  24.9  % of the extreme at -risk -of-poverty threshold for given type of househ old Not applicable  Not available  % of gross wage of single earner  Not applicable  20.1  % of gross minimum wage of single earner (in 2020)  Not applicable  39.2  Note: Only two types of households are described, because national poverty thresholds are only published for these.  Since 2020, the levels of the assistance in material need have been updated on 1 January each year, taking into account changes in the subsistence minimum that occurred in July of the previous year (on the basis of the index which  was used for the adjustment of the subsistence minimum as per 1 July of the previous calendar year – using the lowest coefficient between the growth of net monetary income per capita and the growth of living costs among low -income households).  AMN is paid  for as long as the situation of material need lasts. The amount depends on the condition and situation of the household entitled.  Between 2009 and 2019 the level of AMN was not changed at all. As result, it fell far below the poverty line. In the case of single -adult households, the total amount of AMN fell by 22% relative to the poverty line. In the case of a couple with two children, it fell by 23% (Value for Money, 2020).  A review of the expenditure on groups at risk of poverty and social exclusion (Va lue for Money, 2020), which was carried out by the Ministry of Finance, confirmed a long -standing call by NGOs and experts (Kusá, 2014 ; Gerbery, 2015 ; Gerbery and Miklošovič, 2018 ) for a significant improvement in the adequacy of AMN. It represents the fir st official (i.e. declared by the ministerial authorities) recognition of the low adequacy of minimum income protection in Slovakia.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  1.4  Links with other benefits  Child  benefit  represents an important addition to AMN – it is provided to all households with de pendent children, without any additional conditions. Furthermore, other types of incomes are not taken into account when assessing the income of the claimant’s household (see Section 1.1).  A