Summary  Since the late 1980s and 1990s , Spain has developed  a complicated set of means -tested income support schemes for the working -age population. Until 2020 , its two main components were a complex set of unemployment assistance programmes  and a very diverse set of regional minimum income (MI) schemes. In 2020, the central government adopted  its own nationwide MI scheme, the  Minimum Living Income ( Ingreso Mínimo Vital , IMV ), which is expected to simplify things once it is fully developed.  This set of means -tested benefits is fragmented along several lines  - some  are part of the means -tested tier of social security , while others are part of social assistance. Eligibility criteria are very diverse, inconsistent and sometimes contradictory , creating confusion and coverage gaps.  That fragmentation is the result of mu ltiple different, independent and poorly coordinated actors developing different  strategies to protect different - often overlapping - groups. Unemployment assistance developed as part of the unemployment protection system (itself an autonomous component o f social security) focusing on certain specific groups of unemployed people. Regional MI schemes were developed by each of the 19 autonomous governments , following different models and orientations. There was no clear assignment of responsibilities nor eff ective coordination mechanism across government levels and agencies.  Unemployment assistance and associated programmes are the main component  of the schemes . In December 2020, some 1.2 million people received one of the unemployment assistance benefits. Yearly expenditure in 2020 was about EUR 7 560 million. The IMV was paid in December 2020 to 160  000  households, with expenditure ( from May  2020 ) amount ing to EUR 408 million. The estimate for a full -year expenditure in 2021 is around EUR 1 900 million , covering over 300  000  households . Regional MI schemes were larger than the IMV in 2020 , with some 350  000 households receiv ing the payment d uring 2020 , totallin g EUR 1 970 million  for the year . These figures are difficult to combine, as there may be more than one benefit per household.  Eligibility criteria are diverse and often inconsistent. Assessment unit s, income thresholds, whether assets  are tested or not, a s well as other conditions (nationality, residence, age) vary significantly , with benefits often targeting overlapping groups, or indeed leaving coverage gaps.  Coverage is hard to assess from the data available, which do not provide a consistent picture o f who receives what. Other approaches, such as the EU -SILC data , do not adequately identify means -tested benefits.  Most benefits have amounts below the 40 % of median income  poverty threshold, w ith only some regional programmes com ing closer to the 50 % thre shold. Nationwide programmes do not consider significant differences in the cost of living (especially housing) between regions and urban areas. Some regional programmes partly  compensate for such differences, but others (in expensive metropolitan areas) d o not.  All of the schemes foresee some kind of access to social and/or labour market activation programmes. Unemployment assistance is linked to the usual availability for work and training obligations, while MI schemes include obligations to participate i n social integration or employment -oriented activities. While both employment and social services have developed program mes and activities in the field  - mainly at regional and local level  - and some coordination and integration experiences and pilots exis t, there is no clear common framework for social and labour -market integration support.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of t he financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes       fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social servi ces; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the household s in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  1 