Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2   1 Description of national schemes providing minim um income support  Social assistance ( ekonomiskt bistånd ) is the only benefit of last  resort target ed at  the working -age population in Sweden . Social assistance is available to households  with no other means of supporting themselves. , and applicant s need t o apply for all other relevant benefits in order to be eligible . According to data from the National Board of Health and Welfare ( Socialstyrelsen ), around 374,000 people  received social assistance in 2020, or 3.6% of the Swedish population (5.6% of the wor king -age population aged 15-64). Expenditure on social assistance was 0.24% of GDP in 2020. Spending on unemployment benefits was slightly more than twice this amount, or 0.49% of GDP.  No significant changes have been made to the social assistance legisla tive frameworks in recent years, not even during the C OVID -19 pandemic. Although employment levels fell and unemployment rates increased, the policy responses to the pandemic were primarily to temporarily to strengthen benefits in other welfare systems, th at’s why the reasons for claiming social assistance didn’t change much (Fritzell et al ., 2021).  1.1  Eligibility  Eligibility for social assistance is determined at the level of the household, which is considered to include only nuclear famil ies (i.e.  parents and children aged under 18, or up to 20 if still attending upper secondary education). Grandparents and other people living under the same roof are treated as independent households , and are not taken into account in the means  test.  As a general rule, all the income and benefits of households , whatever their nature or origin, are taken into account in the means  test for social assistance. The only exception is the separate income -tested housing benefit (see more below). Individual’s  that  have received social assistance for a period of six consecutive months are entitled to have 25% of their earnings from employme nt exempted (for a period of up to two years). Annual  income below one ‘price base amount ’ (prisbasbelopp ) earned during vacation s by young people of school age is also exempt.1 In 2021, the price base amount was SEK  47,600 (€4,733). Household  income is n ormally calculated on the basis of incomes in the previous  month, as social assistance in Sweden is intended only to meet short -term needs. Assets are taken into consideration in the means  test, if they are not regarded as essential for the household  to be come self -sufficient. Typical examples are stocks or bonds, a car, a summer house, or expensive consumer electronics  (that is,  assets that relatively easy can be converted into cash ).  All people with the right to stay in the country may be eligible for so cial assistance. As such, permanent residence is not required. Refugees are entitled to social assistance on equal terms with other residents, as long as the ir residence permit is valid. Asylum -seekers are not eligible for social assistance . Instead,  they receive an allowance from the Swedish Migration Agency. Older  people  seldom receive social assistance , as there is a separate low -income benefit at national level for those with very low pensions ( äldreförsörjningsstöd ). Full -time students are normally not  eligible for social assistance, as they instead receive a universal student allowance (often in combination with state -provided student loans).  It should be noted that parents are obliged by law to financially support their children (up to age 20 if the c hild is in secondary education). However, social assistance may in exceptional cases be paid to children  – for example, whe re there is domestic  1 The price base amount is used in Swedish tax and social security legislation to establish various income thresholds. It is calculated based on changes in the consumer price index , in accordance with the National Insurance Act (2010:110). It is  established  for the entire calendar year.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  violence or sexual assault in the household . Adults who are fit to work must  actively look for work, be register ed as unemployed with the public employment service  (arbetsförmedlingen ), accept available job offers, and participate in national labour market programmes or other municipal activation measures if necessary. Failure to comply with these work -related requirements may result in the complete withdrawal of, or a temporary reducti on in , benefits. No special arrangements for eligibility were made in relation to the C OVID -19 pandemic.  Social services are required by law to help people apply for social assistance. Most municipalities have special forms that applicants need to fill in,  either digitally or at social services  offices . Except for personal details, most municipalities require a statement of circumstances. Bank statements and proof of rent expenses are also required in order to show  eligibility. After the application has bee n submitted, the person is usually scheduled for an interview. The waiting times for new applications varies across municipalities, and there are no national targets in this regard. According to a survey by the National Board of Health and Welfare (2021), waiting times for new applications were less than two weeks in 95  percent  of 312 municipalities and city districts. Waiting times are affected not only by administrative procedures and the workload of social services, but also by the complexity of each ind ividual case.   1.2  Coverage  In principle, all people residing in Sweden may be eligible for benefits if they have an income below the national scale rates  and have no other financial assets . However, as with  many other means -tested benefits, there are indicati ons (see below)  that a large share of eligible households  does  not receive any benefits, for one reason or another.  Unfortunately, there are no official data on take -up (i.e. the extent to which eligible families receive a benefit). Nor are there any rece nt in -depth investigations on the issue. According to one estimate, only around two  thirds of single -person families with an income below the threshold for social assistance were eligible in 2018. Of those  eligible , only 28 % actually received a benefit (Ne lson and Nieuwenhuis, 2021).2 The reasons for this non -take -up of social assistance are unknow n, but probably  include a combination of factors ( such as  stigma, lack of information, short -term financial assistance from family and friends, and administrativ e errors). It should be noted that the figures on eligibility and non -take -up above should be interpreted cautiously, as it is very difficult to simulate benefit eligibility using the available micro -level survey and register data . One reason being that mi cro-level survey data seldom  fully capture savings and other assets .  The Swedish Board of Health and Welfare regularly publishes data on the main reasons for which people receive social assistance. In 2020 , unemployment was the main reason in 53% of all cases ; for  18%, it was reduced work capacity  due to social reasons ; and  for 1 4% it was  sickness.  There have been no national action campaigns to increase social assistance benefit take -up in recent years.  1.3  Adequacy  The national scale rates of social assistance are set by reference to reasonable living costs , calculated  by the  Swedish Consumer Agency. Municipalities are allowed to pay more, but not less. The national scale rates are not indexed but are generally updated  on 1 January each year according to changes  in consumer prices, subject to  ad hoc decisions by the government .   2 Estimates based on simulations using EU -SILC. Besides household income, the simulations included a proxy for capital (based on capital income) and work status. People considered to be studying full time, and people with cap ital, were assumed to be ineligible, even if they had an income below the social assistance scale rates. Due to a lack of necessary input data, take -up of other household types was not simulated.    Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  The national scale rates include reasonable costs for : food ; clothes and shoes ; play and leisure ; health and hygiene ; a daily newspaper and a telephone ; and  consumables. After an individual assessment, municipalities often provide additional support to cover the costs of; accommodation ; electricity ; work travel ; home insurance ; trade union membership ; and unemployment insurance fund membership. Social assistance is granted for one month, after which a new application needs to be made. Generally, there is  no review or adjustment to payments in between, even if circumstances change.  The national scale rates take into consideration : the number of people in the household; the  age of children ; whether  children eat lunch at home ; and whether  the adult s are sing le or co -habiting. It should be noted that Sweden is one of those few countries in the world that provide free school lunches to all children. In 2020, the national scale rates (without supplements for lunches of children)  were as follows: a single person without child ren,  SEK  4,160  (€414); a couple without children, SEK 6,800  (€676 ); a couple with two  children ( aged 4 and 8), SEK 12,760  (€1,268 ); and a single parent with two  children ( aged 4 and 8), SEK  10,230  (€1,017 ).  For a single person without child ren, the 2020 national social assistance scale rates correspond to 32% of the EU at -risk -of-poverty threshold  for Sweden , and 48 % of the EU extreme at -risk -of-poverty threshold  for Sweden . For the other household  types, the corresponding rates are ; a couple without children , 52% and 78%; a couple with two  children ( aged 4 and 8) , 98% and 146% ; and a  single parent with two  children (aged 4 and 8) , 78% and  117%.3  (Note that these percentages are calculated based on the equivalised median disposable hou sehold income from the EU -SILC4 (provided by Eurostat) and the equivalised national social assistance scale rates. We have not included a comparison between social assistance and minimum wages, as the latter are negotiated in Sweden – there is no statutor y minimum wage.)  Ratios between social assistance scale rates and poverty thresholds should be interpreted cautiously. In Sweden, housing costs are usually covered in full , often in  combination with  a separate income -tested housing benefit. In addition, re cipients often receive supplements for other costs not included in the national scale rate (see above). If these additional cost categories are included in the calculations, it is not unusual for social assistance to be  provided at twice the level  of the national scale rates.5 Lump -sum payments to cover special on e-off needs are also available (such as replacement of a broken refrigerator) on a discretionary basis.  Redistributive effects are difficult to assess without using more sophisticated st atistical techniques. One obvious reason is that the anti -poverty effects of social assistance are the result of  numerous factors besides legislative frameworks and implementation practi ces, such as  the size and composition of financially vulnerable groups , and changes in other parts of social policy , and notably the social insurance system . Generally, relative income poverty in Sweden is much more sensitive to changes in contributory benefits than in social assistance (Nelson, 2004). The seemingly low take -up of benefits works against the idea of using means -tested social assistance as the main instrument to fight low  income and poverty in Sweden.  1.4  Links with other benefits  As noted above, all incomes and assets, including benefit transfers are considered when assessing eligibility. Social assistance is sometimes  also used as a top -up for other benefits, such as activity support ( aktivitetsersättning ) – a state benefit  3 Own calculations.  4 European Union statistics on income  and living conditions . 5 See: https://www.spin.su.se/datasets/samip . Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  available to those participating in the labour market policy program mes organi sed by the public  employment service. According to a government report prepared with in the framework of the Parliamentary Social Insurance Investigation (Socialförsäkringsutredningen ), around 4 out of 10 people who  received activity support in 2012 received social ass istance as  a top-up (SOU , 2015:21).  Social assistance is designed to cover the most basic needs of low -income families  for a short period in time . The objective is not to provide a minimum acceptable standard of living, but rather reasonable living conditi ons. Social assistance is thus paid at levels above the subsistence minimum ( existensminimum ), as defined by the Swedish Enforcement Agency. The subsistence minimum is used in the context of foreclosure.  2 