Links with labour market activation  All applications for social assistance are subject to an individual assessment, whereby social services on a discretionary basis decide whether the applicant is considered able to work and should participate in a labour market activation programme. In most  cases, able -bodied people are required to participate in the job -search activities and active labour market programmes offered by the public employment service (similar to other unemployed people). In those cases, the applicant may qualify for activity support, and receive social assistance as a top -up.  If it is not possible to find a suitable active labour market programme at national level, social assistance recipients who are considered capable of working may be required to participate in activation pr ogrammes organised at municipal level. These local labour market activation programmes differ extensively across municipalities, but may include: language training; up -skilling; help with job -search; motivational support; work training; traineeships; and v arious measures aimed at preparing recipients to participate in the active labour market policy programmes of the public employment services. Evaluations of the local programmes are lacking. The few evaluations that have been carried out generally report w eak effects (if any) on employability and self -sufficiency (Panican and Ulmestig, 2017). Recipients are often very concerned at the quality of services. They would much rather participate in the labour market programmes of the public employment service, or  look for a job on their own.  Evaluations of national active labour market policies do not make a distinction between recipients of social assistance and recipients of unemployment benefits. No data are even complied on the number of social assistance reci pients who participate in active labour market policy programmes, either at national or local level. Nor are there any data on the average number of clients per case worker. As noted above, non -compliance with the work -related requirements may result in re duced benefits, or benefits being withdrawn in full.  Despite the lack of data, a few differences between recipients of social assistance and recipients of unemployment benefit are worth mentioning. According to interviews with people at the National Board of Health and Welfare, social assistance recipients are often farther away from the labour market than those in receipt of unemployment benefits. The requirement to participate in work -related activities typically appears earlier in the job -integration pro cess for those on social assistance. People in receipt of unemployment benefit are generally only in contact with the public employment service, and not the municipal social services – they cannot be required to participate in work -related activities organ ised by the municipalities.  As noted above, all income of the household (except the housing allowance) is deducted in full of  the social assistance benefit. However, t o increase job incentives further, the government introduced , in July 2013,  an exempt in the means test of  social assistance. For those in receipt of  social assistance benefit for six consecutive  months, 25 percent of earnings are exempt from the means test (as noted above).   It is possible to use this exemption on earned income for up to two consecutive years.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  According to a study conducted by the National Board of Health and Welfare (2016), 1.8% of all social assistance recipients received this tapering of benefits. Among those specifically targeted by the reform (i.e. social assis tance recipients capable of working), 3.6% received a tapering of benefits. Around 60% of those who received a tapering of benefits had dependent children. There was no major difference between men and women.  There is no detailed analysis on the tapering of benefits and transitions out of social assistance in Sweden. According to the study by the National Board of Health and Welfare above, only one out of 167 municipalities reported that the introduction of the taper resulted in more social assistance reci pients getting a job. There were 128 municipalities that believed the reform did not have any effects on employability. In 38 municipalities, there were not enough data to give a definitive answer. Several municipalities (it is unclear how many) reported p roblems of lock -in effects, and prolonged social assistance dependency due to the reform.  3 