Impact of MI schemes  Social assistance is administered and financed by the municipalities but  governed by legislation at national level . Social assistance has wide coverage , and the adequacy of benefits should be evaluated against the whole package of support – which, besides the national scale rates, may include support to cover housing costs and municipal supplements for budget items that are no t considered in the national scale rates . If reasonable, housing costs are met in full by the municipality, sometimes in combination with the national housing benefit. Thus, the impact of social assistance must be assessed in relation to measures in the so cial insurance system as well as in active labour market policies.    There is no regular monitoring of the anti -poverty effects of social assistance, nor how effective measures are at getting  people off benefits and into work. The few studies that exist o f local active labour market program mes report very weak effects on employability. The most immediate problem of social assistance in reducing poverty is the seemingly low take -up-rates, which are well below those for unemployment benefit ( Nelson and Nieuwe nhuis , 2020 ).  Although joblessness is the main reason why people receive social assistance, many recipients have more complex problems. One -stop -shops are used in some municipalities, but they are not necessarily open to all social assistance recipients. By no means  all municipalities have established formal co -operation between social services and other service -providers, such as the public  employment service, the National Social Insurance Agency, and the healthcare sector. Lack of clear rules for collabo ration between service -providers governed by separate legislative frameworks may complicate a multidimensional assessment and treatment of the underlying factors for claiming social assistance.  Public debates on social protection in Sweden seldom focus on  the provision of social assistance. By comparison, social insurance receives much more attention  in the media and in politic al circles . Recently this debate has concerned the continuation of some temporary C OVID -19-related changes to  the system of contrib utory benefits. No changes to social assistance legal frameworks were made during the pandemic. Although the rise of income inequality is a major issue in Sweden (especially for parties on the left of the political spectrum), there is no political priority  given to  extending the coverage (i.e. reducing non -take -up) of social assistance, nor to making benefits more generous.    Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  6 