Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  Eligibility for social assistance is based on an individual assessment, but there is no  detailed regulation concerning implementation. However, a multidimensional perspective is recommended by the National Board of Health and Welfare, particularly if dependency is considered to be long -lasting. In those cases, social services are recommended  to perform a wider and more detailed screening of the underlying circumstances for claiming social assistance. The objective is to identify appropriate support measures at an early stage and to set adequate requirements on the people concerned. These unde rlying circumstances may include: financial debt; alcohol or drug abuse; cognitive or other disabilities; a lack of language skills; sickness or ill -health; a lack of social networks; a poor housing situation; and a lack of education.  There is no legal ob ligation on social services to establish an individual action plan, according to which case workers define the goals of counselling, steps in the integration process, and agreed activities. Nonetheless, individual action plans are used in many municipaliti es. Unfortunately, there are no data on the actual number of social assistance recipients who receive an individual action plan, nor any data on the average number of meetings before an individual action plan is established, or the frequency of follow -ups.  However, according to a survey by the National Board of Health and Welfare (2020), 258 out of 312 municipalities or city districts carried out multidimensional assessments and established individual action plans within three months. The individual action plan was followed up at least every third month in 221 municipalities or city districts (14 municipalities or city districts did not respond to the survey). The National Board of Health and Welfare provides guidelines on how to carry out multidimensional a ssessments of social and financial needs, including a structured assessment template ( förutsättningar för arbete  – FIA). According to the survey above, 45 municipalities or city districts used the FIA framework in the assessment of social and financial nee ds, whereas 191 municipalities or city districts used other structured interview templates.  A large set of services beside those specifically related to labour market activation is provided by social services and is available to social assistance recipien ts. Examples include budget and debt counselling, and family counselling. There are no data on the number of social assistance recipients who are using such services, nor how much they cost the municipalities.  Receipt of social assistance does not automat ically grant access to other types of services and support, which are often provided on a universal basis in Sweden and have comparatively low user fees. However, many social assistance recipients have complex problems that require collaboration between social services and other service -providers. One -stop -shops are implemented in some municipalities, and are in Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  those instances often used to target specific user groups (such as families with young children). Even in situations where one -stop -shops are not i mplemented, municipalities have often established collaboration with other service -provide rs. Collaboration with the healthcare sector (such as psychiatric care and counselling for substance abuse) requires a co -ordinated action plan for each individual ca se. It should be noted that social services are not allowed to condition receipt of social assistance on any other activity besides labour market activation.  Besides the legal obligation of social services to establish co -ordinated action plans with the h ealthcare sector on a case -by-case basis, many municipalities collaborate with other service -providers at organisational level. According to the survey carried out by the National Board of Health and Welfare above, 88 out of 312 municipalities or city dist ricts have formal collaboration agreements with the National Social Insurance Agency ( Försäkringskassan ). Agreements with the public  employment service , similar  to those above,  exist in 132 municipalities or city districts, whereas 103 municipalities or city districts have established formal collaboration with the National Social Insurance Agency. Collaboration at organi sational level with adult psychiatric care exists in 89 mun icipalities or city districts, whereas 14 municipalities or city districts had established formal collaboration with the housing sector.  4 