Governance mechanisms  Social assistance is financed and administered at local level by the municipalities, but the leg islative frameworks are at national level (Socialtjänstlagen , 2001:453 and Socialtjänstförordningen , 2001:937). The National Board of Health and Welfare has a supervising role, provides guidance for the municipalities, and is responsible for national stati stics on social services. The provision of services may be outsourced to private providers. However, those activities that involve the exercise of a statutory authority cannot be outsourced. For example, this includes decisions on social assistance eligibi lity and participation in work -related activities. Appeals against decisions on social assistance eligibility can be made  to the administrative court.  According to statistics from the Swedish Association of Local Authorities and Regions, 26,100 social care  workers ( socialsekreterare ) were employed by the municipalities in 2020. Not all of those were directly involved in the assessment of social assistance. In total, 35,300 people were employed in social services (around 4 % of all personnel of the municipali ties and the regions). In Sweden, two main tasks of the regions are to organi se healthcare and public transport.  In terms of monitoring frameworks for social services, the National Board of Health and Welfare carries out qualitative assessments, or ‘open c omparisons ’ (öppna jämförelser ). Various aspects are included in this monitoring, such as : waiting times ; collaborative frameworks with other service -providers ; and  assessment procedures and routines. According to these data, around one third of all munici palities or city districts use systematic reviews of social services to improve their  operation, including payments of social assistance (National Board of Health and Welfare, 2021). Besides the open comparison, the National Board of Health and Welfare and  the Swedish Association of Local Authorities and Regions, as well as individual municipalities , carry out ad  hoc investigations of various aspects related to the payment of social assistance.  There is no regular monitoring of the poverty -reducing effects  of social assistance. In fact, Sweden has no official definition of poverty. In government reports and investigations, reference is seldom made to poverty, but instead to low income. There is no income threshold to define the latter. Officially, the numbe r of low -income families in Sweden simply equal s the number of families in receipt of social assistance.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  5 