Summary  The Swedish National minimum income scheme is constructed and assessed in relation to other  part of the welfare system such as housing allowance, unemployment insurance, establishment allowance and pensions . Social assistance is the only minimum income scheme in Sweden that targets individuals and families with low-income. The benefit is financed and administered by the municipalities, via the social services.  Social assistance is means -tested and takes both income and assets into account . All residents in Sweden may be eligible for social assistance. The nation al social assistance scale rates are set at levels below the EU at -risk -of-poverty threshol d, but according to the national guidelines people may also qualify for social assistance outside the se rates.  Social assistance is rights -based, in so far as it is  possib le to appeal against decisions of social services to the administrative court.  Recipients who are fit to work but are further away from the labour market need to register with the public employment service, actively seek employment, and be prepared to accept available job offers. At the discretion of social services, they may also be required to participate in active labour market policy measures.  Eligibility for social assistance is based on an individual assessment  while considering the financial situation of the household , but there is no legal requirement to set  up individual action plans. However, a majority of municipalities and city districts have an individual action plan ready within three months.  Although social services offer various type s of counselling and support measures to help recipients fulfil  the underlying conditions for receiving social assistance, many municipalities have formal co -operation arrangements with other service -providers (such as the public  employment service, the Na tional Social Insurance Office, and the healthcare sector).  There is no regular monitoring of the poverty -reducing effects of social assistance, and there are only a few studies on the effectiveness of active labour market policy in getting  recipients of f the welfare rolls and into employment. Most evidence suggest s that local active labour market policies targeting social assistance recipients have only weak effects on employability.  There is no political debate in Sweden about extending the coverage of s ocial assistance (i.e. increasing take -up), nor about making benefits more generous. The COVID -19 pandemic did not result in any changes to social assistance legislative frameworks ; nor were there any major changes in caseloads . The main reason was that other benefits either responded directly to the increased need for financial support , or were temporarily reformed to meet the increased need.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibili ty criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support provided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summarise the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underly ing situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education le vel, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2   1 Description of national schemes providing minim um income support  Social assistance ( ekonomiskt bistånd ) is the only benefit of last  resort target ed at  the working -age population in Sweden . Social assistance is available to households  with no other means of supporting themselves. , and applicant s need t o apply for all other relevant benefits in order to be eligible . According to data from the National Board of Health and Welfare ( Socialstyrelsen ), around 374,000 people  received social assistance in 2020, or 3.6% of the Swedish population (5.6% of the wor king -age population aged 15-64). Expenditure on social assistance was 0.24% of GDP in 2020. Spending on unemployment benefits was slightly more than twice this amount, or 0.49% of GDP.  No significant changes have been made to the social assistance legisla tive frameworks in recent years, not even during the C OVID -19 pandemic. Although employment levels fell and unemployment rates increased, the policy responses to the pandemic were primarily to temporarily to strengthen benefits in other welfare systems, th at’s why the reasons for claiming social assistance didn’t change much (Fritzell et al ., 2021).  1.1  Eligibility  Eligibility for social assistance is determined at the level of the household, which is considered to include only nuclear famil ies (i.e.  parents and children aged under 18, or up to 20 if still attending upper secondary education). Grandparents and other people living under the same roof are treated as independent households , and are not taken into account in the means  test.  As a general rule, all the income and benefits of households , whatever their nature or origin, are taken into account in the means  test for social assistance. The only exception is the separate income -tested housing benefit (see more below). Individual’s  that  have received social assistance for a period of six consecutive months are entitled to have 25% of their earnings from employme nt exempted (for a period of up to two years). Annual  income below one ‘price base amount ’ (prisbasbelopp ) earned during vacation s by young people of school age is also exempt.1 In 2021, the price base amount was SEK  47,600 (€4,733). Household  income is n ormally calculated on the basis of incomes in the previous  month, as social assistance in Sweden is intended only to meet short -term needs. Assets are taken into consideration in the means  test, if they are not regarded as essential for the household  to be come self -sufficient. Typical examples are stocks or bonds, a car, a summer house, or expensive consumer electronics  (that is,  assets that relatively easy can be converted into cash ).  All people with the right to stay in the country may be eligible for so cial assistance. As such, permanent residence is not required. Refugees are entitled to social assistance on equal terms with other residents, as long as the ir residence permit is valid. Asylum -seekers are not eligible for social assistance . Instead,  they receive an allowance from the Swedish Migration Agency. Older  people  seldom receive social assistance , as there is a separate low -income benefit at national level for those with very low pensions ( äldreförsörjningsstöd ). Full -time students are normally not  eligible for social assistance, as they instead receive a universal student allowance (often in combination with state -provided student loans).  It should be noted that parents are obliged by law to financially support their children (up to age 20 if the c hild is in secondary education). However, social assistance may in exceptional cases be paid to children  – for example, whe re there is domestic  1 The price base amount is used in Swedish tax and social security legislation to establish various income thresholds. It is calculated based on changes in the consumer price index , in accordance with the National Insurance Act (2010:110). It is  established  for the entire calendar year.  