Links with labour market activation  Under the Participation Act (‘ Participatiewet’ ), those who apply for minimum income benefit (‘ algemene bijstand ’) and are below retirement age are required to register as a jobseeker at the Institute for Em ployee Insurance (‘ Uitvoeringsinstituut Werknemersverzekeringen ’).25 Those who are fully and permanently unfit for work are exempt. Single parents with children up to 12 years are only required to register if the municipality representative has convinced h imself that suitable childcare  and sufficient schooling are available and that the parent is not overburdened. Single parents that have the full care for a child below the age of 5 can get an exemption on request. In addition to the above, municipalities can grant individual exemptions  in case of urgent reasons such as care duties.  No further exemptions were introduced due to COVID 19.  Minimum income benefit recipients aged between 18 and the retirement age are obliged to – according to ability – search for, accept and keep a generally acceptable job; accept services offered by the municipality’s college of mayor and aldermen aimed at labour market activation and cooperate in an individual investigation into the recipient's possibilities of participating in the labour market; and – accor ding to ability – perform unpaid socially useful activities.    The Inspectorate SZW (2019), part of the Dutch Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment, conducted a survey among 755 'classic' minimum income benefit recipients and asked them about the requ irement to actively seek work or participate  23 The amount of child care allowance depends, in addition to someone's income, on the number of children and the type of child care. Ch ild care allowance can only be claimed for child care that is approved by the municipality. The number of hours for which child care allowance can be claimed, depends on the number of hours worked by the parent who works the lowest number of hours. For chi ldren aged below 4, child care allowance can be claimed for up to 140% of the hours worked by the (least working) parent. For children of primary school age, child care allowance can be claimed for up to 70% of the hours worked by the (least working) paren t. In addition, the total number of hours claimed cannot exceed the maximum of 230 hours per month per child. The hourly rate for which child care allowance can be claimed is also subject to a maximum (2021: € 8.46 (day care child care centre, 0 -4 years), € 7.27 (after -school care child care centre, 4 -12 years), € 6.49 (childminder, 0 -12 years)). The proportion of the costs of child care that is subsidised, depends on someone's income and the number of children. In 2021, for parents with a (joint) annual in come below € 25,709, 96% of the costs of child care was subsidised, irrespective of the number of children. This subsidy percentage gradually decreases for higher levels of income in a way that differentiates between the first child and any additional chil dren. Child care allowance is not subject to an asset test.  24 Special social assistance is available for costs that are not covered by other allowances, for example costs related to illness, relocation or divorce. Municipalities assess to what extent the c osts cannot be paid from the income and/or assets of the claimant, approve or reject the applications for special social assistance, and provide the special social assistance to applicants whose application is approved. Special social assistance (‘bijzonde re bijstand’ ) is separate from regular social assistance (‘ algemene bijstand’ ) and hence receiving the former is not conditional on receiving the latter.  25 Registration implies that someone is listed as a job seeker on the webpage ‘werk.nl’ and hence can b e approached with job offers. In practice, not all municipalities use werk.nl and hence the obligation to register is not always relevant.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  12  in labour market reintegration activities.26 56 % of recipients declared to be exempt from this requirement. The self reported exemption rate was highest among people between 55 and retirement age: around 68 per cent. But also among recipients below the age of 35, more than half claimed to be exempt. Of all the respondents that declared to be exempt, around 40 percent had received a formal decision from the government about their exemption, while 25 percent had no t received such a decision. The remaining respondents did not know whether they had received a formal decision. 60 percent of the respondents that claimed to be exempt from the requirement to actively seek work or participate in reintegration activities, r eceived an exemption due to illness or disability. Other reported reasons included the care of children, following a course or study, the fact that the respondent already worked in addition to receiving the benefit, caregiving duties or old age. Almost two  thirds of the respondents that claimed to be exempt had made other arrangements, such as a commitment to doing volunteer work, learning the Dutch language or do something in return.  Except for those who are fully and permanently unfit for work, all minim um income benefit recipients below retirement age (2021: 66 years and 4 months) are obliged to cooperate in an individual investigation into their possibilities of participating in the labour market, and to cooperate in drawing up, implementing and evaluat ing an individual plan of action27. This plan sets out the support provided by the government, the recipient's obligations with respect to labour market participation (efforts), and the consequences of any non -compliance. The municipality's college of mayo rs and aldermen accompanies the recipient in executing the plan of action and periodically evaluates (and possibly adjusts) the plan in consultation with the recipient. Rules around government support are set by municipalities and support can include for example coaching, schooling or training, wage cost subsidies or sheltered work facilities. All these activities are ultimately aimed at labour market participation but they can include social activation activities, in as far as these help to improve the recipient's labour market prospects. Municipalities are the primary government body involved but they collaborate with the Institute for Employee Insurance (‘Uitvoeringsinstituut Werknemersverzekeringen’).  The Participation Act stipulates that the minimum inc ome benefit can be temporarily lowered in case the recipient fails to fulfil the obligations set out in the Act. The rules concerning these sanctions are set locally by the municipalities' colleges of mayors and aldermen but are subject to detailed require ments set out in the Act:  1: The college of mayor and aldermen (henceforth 'the college') always lowers the minimum income benefit in case the recipient fails to fulfil the following obligations: accepting or keeping a generally acceptable job; being regis tered at an employment agency; finding a generally acceptable job in another municipality before moving to that municipality; being prepared to travel up to 3 hours a day in order to take up or keep a generally acceptable job; being prepared to move house in case the college sees no other possibility for the recipient to find, accept or keep a generally acceptable job, and the recipient can take up a job with a minimum duration of a year and a net wage that is at least equal to the social assistance norm; a cquiring and retaining knowledge and skills, necessary for finding or keeping a generally acceptable job; ensuring that the prospect of finding or keeping a generally acceptable job is not hindered by inappropriate clothing, lack of personal care or inappr opriate behaviour; accepting government support aimed at the recipient's labour market participation, including activities aimed at social activation, and cooperating in an individual investigation into the recipient's possibilities of participating in the  labour market.   26 These are recipients that would already have received the benefit under the previous scheme. They account for at l east 90 % of all recipients  27 This obligation starts from the day an applicant registers for the benefit (already before the full application is submitted). The Participation Act does not contain any formal deadline for the completion of the assessment and  action plan.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  13  2: In case the recipient fails to fulfil any of the obligations listed above, the college lowers the benefit by 100 % for a period of at least 1 month and at most 3 months.  3: In case the recipient fails to fulfil any of the obligations listed above in the 12 months following the first imposed sanction, the college lowers the benefit by 100 % for a period that is longer than the period of the first sanction but not longer than 3 months.  4: In case the recipient fails to fulfil any of the obligations listed a bove in the 12 months following the second sanction, the college lowers the benefit by 100 % for a period of 3 months. The same goes for any subsequent sanctions.  5: The college re -assesses all sanctions within a period of at most three months.  6: The coll ege refrains from imposing sanctions if there is no culpability of any kind.  7: In case of urgent reasons, the college adapts the sanction to the recipient's circumstances and possibilities to generate income.  8: The college can revise the sanction on re quest of the recipient in case the recipient clearly fulfils all the obligations listed above.  The Participation Act also regulates the tapering of minimum income benefit on take -up of a job. The benefit is additional to any existing income and provides mo nthly income support up to the 'social minimum', which depends on age and living situation and represents the government's norm for minimum subsistence. The general rule is that all earned income is deducted from the benefit. However, there are a few excep tions:  1: For people who receive minimum income benefit, 25 % of earned income is not deducted from the benefit, with a maximum of € 221 per month (October 2021). However, this rule does not equally apply for everyone. For benefit recipients above the reti rement age, it always applies. For benefit recipients below the retirement age but aged above 27, it applies for a maximum period of six months and only if, according to the municipality's college of mayors and aldermen (henceforth 'the college'), it contr ibutes to the recipient's labour market activation. For benefit recipients aged below 27, the rule does not apply and hence all earned income is deducted from the benefit.  2: For single -parent recipients of minimum income benefit with the full care of a ch ild aged below 12, 12.5 % of earned income is not deducted from the benefit, with a maximum of € 137.94 per month (October 2021) and for a maximum period of 30 consecutive months, and only if the 6 -month period mentioned in the previous bullet has passed a nd if, according to the college, it contributes to the recipient's labour market activation. For benefit recipients aged below 27, this rule does not apply and hence all earned income is deducted from the benefit.  3: For recipients of minimum income benefi t who due to illness, pregnancy or child -birth are unable to work fulltime, 15 % of earned income is not deducted from the benefit, with a maximum of € 139.90 per month (October 2021), unless any of the previous two non -deductibility conditions apply.  4: In addition to the general rules above, the college can decide not to deduct a one -time or two -time premium with a maximum of € 2,638 per calendar year, in as far as, according to the college, this contributes to the recipient's labour market activation.  The rules around tapering have not changed recently, except for the maximum amounts of earned income that are not deducted. According to Statistics Netherlands (2020), 13 % of the 530,000 people that received minimum income benefit in 2018 had a paid job.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  14  The new government, which took office in January 2022, announced that it wants to increase the ceiling of what minimum income benefit recipients can earn without having their benefit reduced.  The Inspectorate SZW (2019) reported - based on a survey about ac tive labour market policies among regular minimum income benefit recipients (which constitute at least 90 % of all recipients) - that in the previous six months 27 % of recipients had had one or more interviews with a staff member of social services on the ir possibilities to find a job, 18 % had received help with writing an application letter or cv, 18 % had followed a reintegration process for people who are not yet fit for work, 17 % of recipients had been assigned a work experience position, 15 % of rec ipients had received job application training, 15 % of recipients had participated in a training course or schooling (excl. job application training), 10 % of recipients had received help with searching for a job, 7 % of recipients had taken a competence t est, 6 % of recipients had received help with job interviews, 6 % of recipients had been introduced to a potential employer, and 5 % of recipients had been alerted to a job vacancy28. Recipients continue to receive full minimum income benefits when partici pating in active labour market policies. In fact, participating in such activities is typically a requirement for receiving full benefits.  The Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP) carried out an evaluation of the Participation Act in 2019, commi ssioned by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment (SZW). It focused on the question to what extent and in which way the Act leads people to work. The results showed that the Act had until then hardly reached its goal of more people with a distance t o the labour market finding a (preferably regular) job. For some groups the chances of finding a job had even decreased. In particular, while young disabled people with the potential to work had become more likely to find a job (although they had seen thei r disposable incomes fall on average), especially the group of people with physical, mental or psychological limitations had faced a lower probability of finding a job. Before the introduction of the Participation Act, the social employment act (‘Wet Socia le Werkvoorziening’) provided this group with work in a sheltered environment. In addition to being less likely to find a job, those who did find one were more likely to work on a temporary contract and were more likely to depend on social assistance to su pplement their wages. More “regular” social assistance recipients, who previously did not fall under a special arrangement, had hardly seen any increase in the probability of finding a job. Their chances had remained very low, and when they did find work, it was more likely to be temporary and part -time.  In 2017, the Dutch government allowed six municipalities to experiment with different rules for social assistance for a period of two years. The interventions that were studied, included an exemption from r eintegration requirements, increased support and guidance, and allowing benefit recipients to earn income without having their benefit reduced. CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (De Boer et al., 2020) carried out an evaluation of the impa ct of the interventions on the number of hours of paid work. The results showed no or (at most moderate) effects. In particular, an exemption from reintegration requirements had no significant impact on paid work, while increased support and guidance, and making earned income non -deductible, significantly raised the number of hours worked in only one out of three municipalities (the results of the other three could not be interpreted).29  28 Although not documented in the study, p resumably many recipients received multiple kinds of support.  29 According to Koning (2020), the interpretation of these findings is not straightforward because of limited sample size and because it is unclear to what extent reintegration requirements were actually enforced prior to the experiment.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  15  3 