Links to social services and integrated provision of targeted social services  The main reintegration goal of the Participation Act is to help as many people as possible - including the ones with little work capacity - in finding a (preferably regular) job. While there is no uniform  multidimensional assessment of soci al needs, the Act – and the decentralisations in the social domain more generally – aim to assess individual needs at the local level and offer an integrated approach in order to increase social participation. Municipalities  in varying degrees recognise an d try to address the individual needs of benefit recipients. However, the available budget typically limits the possibilities for case managers to help clients improve their multidimensional wellbeing. This is further aggravated by financial incentives tha t typically make municipalities focus on the benefit recipients with the best labour market prospects. As a result, the substantial group of minimum income benefit recipients with a large distance to the labour market often receives relatively little guida nce and support. At the same time, municipalities recognize the needs of this group and indicate that they would like to do more to support these people. In fact, one of the reasons to shift the responsibility for minimum income benefit recipients to munic ipalities in the Participation Act of 2015 was the notion that municipalities are well positioned to assess and address multidimensional needs of people. It was expected that this would make it easier to implement an integral approach to the multiple probl ems that clients are faced with. Even when the Participation Act offers only limited means to support the multidimensional needs of people, case managers are typically well informed about the clients' situation and well positioned to play a role as a sparr ing partner or coach. They can refer clients to forms of support outside the domain of the Participation Act. Within the domain, there are also limited forms of support that focus on stabilising the personal situation of clients and improving their quality  of life. The extent to which case managers take on a proactive role as sparring partner or coach in practice varies across municipalities. In some cases there is active involvement with explicit (pilot) projects being undertaken, while in other cases clie nts are mostly left alone.30  Various types of targeted  social services (including the ones aimed at labour market activation) are routinely provided to minimum income benefit recipients (although the extent to which varies across municipalities). The Insp ectorate SZW (2019) reported - based on a survey among regular minimum income benefit recipients (which constitute at least 90 % of all recipients) - that in the previous six months: 22 % of recipients had received support through the social support law (‘ Wet Maatschappelijke Ondersteuning ’), 17 % of recipients had received mental health care support (‘GGZ’), 14 % of recipients had received debt counselling, 6 % of recipients had received psychological, mental or physical support through foundations or asso ciations, 5 % of recipients had received youth care (‘ Jeugdzorg’ ), 4 % of recipients had received support from a rehabilitation doctor, and 4 % of recipients had received support for homeless people. The proportions of recipients that had received support in the form of language courses, sports and exercise coaching, support in finding or keeping volunteer work, activities aimed at social participation, and daytime activities are unknown. While expenditures on these targeted social services may in many case s be the result of government efforts within the domain of the Participation Act, the expenditures themselves are often covered by other budgets, which makes it currently impossible to provide a clear overview of total expenditures.  The Participation Act also contains some provisions for general  services, in particular education and health care. Students who are entitled to study grants (‘studiefinanciering of tegemoetkoming onderwijsbijdrage en schoolkosten’ ) and  30 Six municipalities  experimented with different rules for social assistance for a period of two years. See the previous section on the links with labour market activation.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  16  cannot generate any income during their st udy due to a permanent medical disability, are entitled to an individual asset -tested study allowance (‘ individuele studietoeslag’ ). Minimum income benefit recipients who have performed unpaid work (‘participatieplaats’ ) for a period of six months and who do not have a basic qualification (‘ diploma havo, vwo, mbo niveau 2 of hoger’ ) are offered schooling/education to make them more employable, unless it is expected that completing the schooling/education is not feasible for the recipient or if it is not exp ected to make him or her more employable. Special social assistance (‘ bijzondere bijstand’ ) is available for a wide range of necessary costs of existence (see subsection on links with other benefits) but, in terms of the general services discussed here, ca n also specifically be granted to (partly) cover the costs of collective additional health insurance (‘ collectieve aanvullende zorgverzekering ’). 4 