Governance mechanisms  At the national level, the Minister and State Secretary of Social Affairs and Employment  (SZW) are responsible for the whole of tasks, responsibilities, rights, duties and resources aimed at reaching the goals of the Participation Act (‘Participatiewet’ ). Their ministerial responsibility implies that they are accountable to the Parliament. Th e fact that, under the Act, the tasks and responsibilities for implementation are to a large extent delegated to municipalities does not change this. The Minister and State Secretary are responsible for the functioning of the system as a whole ( 'systeemver antwoordelijkheid' ). In practice, the Minister and State Secretary of SZW are responsible for the way in which municipalities can fulfil their tasks, both through the delegation of authority (regulation) and the provision of resources (financing); focus on  the legal framework only and not on the way in which individual municipalities perform their tasks within that framework, as this is up to the municipalities themselves; have the responsibility to change the system if it should become apparent that it doe s not function properly or is no longer tailored to the problems of our time; have the responsibility to supervise the implementation and intervene in case of unlawful action by municipalities or other government bodies.  At local level, the municipalities'  colleges of mayor and aldermen (henceforth colleges) are responsible for the implementation of the Act. In terms of governance, there is strictly speaking no direct hierarchy between the central government and local municipalities. Colleges are accountabl e to the municipality councils, while Minister and State Secretary are accountable to the national parliament. Colleges have a substantial degree of freedom in terms of shaping local policies and allocating local responsibilities, albeit within the regulat ory framework and goals of the Act. The laws and regulations at the local and national levels are hierarchical, with the former being subordinate to the latter. While responsibility for implementation lies with municipalities, the responsibility for (natio nal) regulation and financing of the Act rests with the central government (Minister and State Secretary of SZW).  SZW’s system responsibility includes the active collection of information needed to assess if and how the system works and whether changes are needed. Formally, this refers to the continuous gathering of quantitative policy information, the evaluation of the Participation Act, the monitoring, and the results of system supervision by the Inspectorate SZW. The Minister and State Secreta ry of SZW annually inform parliament about the implementation of the Act, based on the available information. Formal information collection is subject to the rules of intergovernmental information, in particular the principle that only information is gathe red that is relevant for the system responsibility of the central government and that the information provision by municipalities is not accompanied by an excessive accountability burden. Monitoring and evaluation is mostly concerned with assessing the ext ent to which the primary goal of the Act is reached, namely supporting benefit recipients in finding a job, preferably at a regular employer, and make them as little as possible dependent on benefits.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  17  The implementation of the monitoring and evaluation of the Participation Act is documented in an action plan that was submitted to the parliament in 2013. It contains a quantitative and a qualitative part. The former is based on regular statistics of Statistics Netherlands (CBS), such as reintegration figures of municipalities (‘Statistiek Re -integratie Gemeenten : SRG’) and various periodic reports on jobs, sheltered employment, illness/disability/unemployment (‘ banenmonitor, Wsw -monitor, monitor uitval ZW/WW/WIA, herindeling Wajong’ ). The qualitative part cons ists of research (once every two years) under clients, employers, municipalities and managers of the Institute for Employee Insurance (‘ Uitvoeringsinstituut Werknemersverzekeringen’ ) into their experiences with the implementation of the Act. The overall re ports on social domain (‘ overall rapportages sociaal domein’ ) of the Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP), commissioned by the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations (BZK) provide a broad overview of (changes in) the quality of life of v arious social service user groups at the macro level, including recipients of minimum income benefits, based on national surveys. They also document (changes in) the use of social services and the extent to which people use multiple services at the same ti me (clustering). SZW annually sends a letter to the Parliament with an overview of all information regarding the implementation of the Act.  When the Participation Act (‘ Participatiewet’ ) was introduced in 2015, it was agreed that it would be evaluated with in six years after its introduction. The final evaluation was performed by the Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP) in 2019, commissioned by the Ministry of SZW, and presented to parliament in November 2019. The report is publicly available. The  evaluation did not make recommendations but instead formulated points of attention. There is no formal mechanism that ensures that specific recommendations - should there be any - are implemented but under its system responsibility for the Act, the Minist er and State Secretary of SZW are responsible for making changes to the system if it is shown not to work properly, and are in this respect held accountable by the Parliament. As a recent example, t he new government, which took office in January 2022, anno unced various changes, such as the intention to assess the adequacy of minimum income support every four years and the intention to abolish the cost -sharing norm (‘kostendelersnorm’) for young adults aged 27 and below.  5 