Description of national schemes providing minimum income support  The Dutch minimum income scheme is governed by the Participa tion Act (‘Participatiewet ’). It targets people with work capacity who (temporarily) need support in providing for their livelihood and/or in finding a job. Its overall objective is that each citizen participates in society according to their ability, and provides for their own maintenance as much as possible. The first goal of the act is to help as many people as possible - including the ones with little work capacity - in finding a (preferably regular) job. The second goal is to guarantee a minimum income  for everyone, including people who are not capable of providing for their own livelihood. The Participation Act is intended to harmonise the previously distinct rules and support for people with a work -limiting disability or who are far removed from the l abour market. Since its introduction in 2015, they all fall under the same law with the same rights and duties.  People who receive disability benefit on the basis of the Disability Insurance Act (‘WAO’) or the Work and Income according to Work Capacity La w (‘WIA’) do not fall under the Participation Act. These are employees who – due to illness or disability – became (partially or fully) incapable of working but were not incapable before starting their jobs. Municipalities are responsible for implementatio n of the Participation Act (though the level of income is centrally determined). They have a range of options available to help people find a job. Some of these already existed, such as work experience positions or job coaching. Others are new, such as the wage cost subsidy and sheltered work facility. The former is available to employers who are willing to take on people who are not able to earn the statutory minimum wage. The latter is available for people whose disability keeps them from working for a regular employer.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  3  In response to the Covid -19 pandemic, the social assistance arrangement for the self -employed (‘Besluit bijstandverlening zelfstandigen’) – which falls under the Participation Act – was temporarily adapted and given a new name: the tempora ry emergency social assistance scheme for self -employed (‘tijdelijke overbruggingsregeling zelfstandig ondernemers, TOZO’). TOZO was a supplementary and temporary allowance that could be used for topping up for instance lost income or low earnings for self -employed persons legally residing in the Netherlands with inadequate financial resources to meet their essential living costs as a result of the pandemic1. TOZO differed from the regular social assistance scheme in several ways. There was no obligation of job -search. The arrangement was temporary and was extended several times until it came to an end on October 1st 20212. It was limited to the self -employed and managing directors -major shareholders (‘directeur -grootaandeelhouders’). The benef it amounts were identical to the regular scheme (no cost sharing standard was applied). There was no asset or savings test. During Tozo 1, only the income of the applicant was taken into account (the income of the spouse or civil partner was excluded from the means test). From Tozo 2 onwards, total household income was taken into account.  1.1  Eligibility  The Participation Act sets out eligibility criteria for (means tested) minimum income support (‘ algemene bijstand’ ) as follows:  1.  Income : Minimum income suppor t is a safety net of last resort. It tops up existing income, if any, and provides monthly support up to the “social minimum”, which depends on age and living situation and represents the government's norm for minimum subsistence. Hence, to be eligible for  minimum income support, one’s net monthly income may not exceed this social minimum, which is derived from the statutory minimum wage (which is itself linked to the contract wages in the private and public sectors). The threshold amounts are updated twice  a year based on changes in the “reference minimum wage” (‘referentieminimumloon’). This is the net amount that a couple would end up with in the hypothetical case that one of them would receive a gross (before tax) benefit equal to the statutory gross min imum wage including holiday supplement, while the other would have no income. In practice, the threshold amounts for minimum income support represent fixed percentages of the reference minimum wage. For working age singles of age 21 and older without cost -sharing co -residents, the net amount equals 70 % of the reference minimum wage. For a married or co -habiting couple, the net amount for both together corresponds to 100 % of the reference minimum wage. The same amounts apply for households with children bu t child allowance and child budget are added to the norm amounts. The norm amounts for people below age 21 are lower, while the norm amounts for people above retirement age are higher3. All income from employment, transfers, capital and rent is taken into   1 TOZO was introduced as part of a broader emergency package, which also included financial support to firms to ensure that they could continue paying their staff (‘tijdelijke noodmaatregel overbrugging voor werkbehoud, NOW)’.  2 Tozo 1 ran from March until May 2020; Tozo 2 ran from June until September 2020; Tozo 3 ran from October 2020 until March 2021; Tozo 4 ran from April until June 2021; Tozo 5 ran from July until September 2021.  3 During the period from July 1st 2021 until January 1st 2022, the net am ounts per month were as follows. Singles and single parents, aged 18, 19 or 20: € 266. Couples, both aged 18, 19 or 20, without children: € 533. Couples, one of which aged 18, 19 or 20, the other aged between 21 and retirement age: € 1,037. Couples, aged 1 8, 19 or 20, with children: € 841. Couples, one of which aged 18, 19 or 20, the other aged between 21 and retirement age, with children: € 1,345. Singles and single parents from 21 years to retirement age: € 1,079. Couples from 21 years to retirement age, with or without children: € 1,541. Singles and single parents above Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  4  account with a long list of exceptions4. Income is taken into account only up to the amount that remains after deduction of income tax, social contributions, income -related contributions to the health insurance law, and other mandatory deductions.  2. Assets : In addition to thresholds for income, there are also thresholds for assets, which depend on people's living situation and are updated every calendar year. To be eligible for minimum income support, one’s assets may not exceed the threshold. Assets includ e financial wealth (such as savings) and other assets, including (second) homes, with a list of exceptions5. Their value is determined according to full market value. Assets belonging to minors are included. Any debts for which repayment cannot be postpon ed (this excludes study debts and debts that can be repaid later, such as family loans) are subtracted. People whose net assets exceed the legal threshold are not (yet) entitled to minimum income support ( algemene bijstand ) and are assumed to  retirement age: € 1,200. Couples, one or both of which above retirement age, with or without children: € 1,627. Singles from 21 years to retirement age with one cost -sharing co -resident: €  771. Singles from 21 years to retirement age with two cost -sharing co -residents: € 668. Couples from 21 years to retirement age with one cost -sharing co -resident: € 1,336. Couples from 21 years to retirement age with two cost -sharing co -residents: € 1,233 . Singles and single parents residing in an institution: € 376. Couples residing in an institution: € 607.  4 The following forms of income are excluded: income received to cover the subsistence of a person who is not included in the social assistance; chil d allowance; young disabled person's tax credit (only for those aged 27 and above); income -tested benefits, such as rent allowance, health care allowance, child care allowance and child budget; home ownership contributions; allowances to cover expenditures  that are not part of the generally necessary costs of subsistence, unless (special) social assistance is provided to cover these costs; allowances to cover expenditures on for example training or schooling aimed at generating income, unless (special) soci al assistance is provided to cover these costs; income from work, unemployment or disability benefits of children below the age of 18, unless it concerns (special) social assistance to cover subsistence costs for these children; interest on capital and sav ings; once or twice a premium of at most € 2,638 per calendar year, in as far as the municipality believes this contributes to labour market participation (only for those aged 27 and above); expense allowance for volunteer work (up to a maximum), only for those aged 27 and above; allowances to cover material and immaterial damage to be designated by ministerial regulation; donations to cover material and immaterial damage in as far as the municipality believes these are appropriate; 25% of income from work (up to a maximum) during the first six months of entitlement to social assistance and only if the municipality believes it contributes to labour market participation (only for those aged 27 and above), after this period: income from work for single parents  (up to a maximum and for a maximum period of 30 months), only for those aged 27 and above, after these periods: income from work (up to 15% with a maximum) when the working possibilities of a person are limited because of medical reasons; provisions from a life -course savings scheme; allowances in addition to the survivor's benefit; allowances in addition to the young disabled person's benefit; allowances on the basis of various laws for the chronically ill or disabled; income received by caregivers as a t oken of appreciation by local government; subsistence allowances that recipients below the age of 21 receive from their parent(s) in as far as these allowances have already been taken into account in the determination of the right to special assistance; in come -support in addition to the old -age pension; personal budget (pgb) received to purchase care.  5 The following forms of assets are excluded: net value of homeowners' houses up to the threshold of € 53,100; assets in kind that are either generally common or necessary given the recipient's circumstances; savings accumulated during the period in which the benefit is received; allowances to cover material and immaterial damage to be designated by ministerial regulation; donations to cover mat erial and immaterial damage in as far as the municipality believes these are appropriate; provisions from a life -course savings scheme.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  5  use their ass ets to support themselves. They are entitled to minimum income support as soon as their net assets fall below the threshold6. 3. Other eligibility criteria : Aside from the income and asset tests, various other criteria apply when determining eligibility for minimum income benefits. Actual legal residence in the Netherlands is required.7 Recipients must be over 18 and must do as much as possible  to find work and support themselves, except in case of urgent medical or social circumstances. In addition, recipie nts cannot meet any of a list of exclusion criteria8. Other than the question of whether the income threshold is high enough (see 1.3 on adequacy), there are no obvious other concerns about low -income groups that are left out due to eligibility criteria t hat are too restrictive9 However, this does not mean that there are no concerns about the conditions for benefit recipients and the vulnerability of certain groups. With respect to the former, some argue that the (tighter enforcement of) existing obligations and the introduction of new obligations (e.g. relocation, clothing and language duties) in recent years constitute an unjust treatment of benefit recipients (see for example Kampen, Sebrechts, Knijn and Tonkens (eds.), 2020). With respect to the targeting of vulnerable groups,  it is sometimes argued that these groups have suffered from the one -size -fits-all approach of the Participation Act.  1.2  Coverage  In 2019 and 2020, around 480,000 people, or 2.75 % of the Dutch population, received minimum income benefit10,11. The benefit is  highly targeted and so in principle covers the people with the lowest incomes. Its level does not guarantee a minimally necessary standard of living, or at least not for everyone (see 1.3 on adequacy). As a result, minimum income benefit recipients consti tute a considerable share of the adult population living below the poverty line. In 2017, around 666,000 adults had an income below the threshold of the Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP), based on the modest -but-adequate criterion (Hoff et al ., 2019). 152,000 (or 23 %) of those received minimum income benefit12. While this is a  6 The asset thresholds for 2021 were as follows. Singles: € 6,295. Single parents: € 12,590. Households with two or more  adults: € 12,590.  7 People without a home or mailing address can submit a request for a mailing address in order to be able to receive minimum income benefit.  8 The following people are not eligible for minimum income support: those who are serving or eva ding a custodial sentence, those who are in (alternative) military service, those who are not working due to participation in a labour strike, those who are abroad for more than 4 weeks per calendar year or for more than 4 weeks consecutively, those who ap ply for social assistance in order to repay debts while their income was above the threshold for social assistance when the debt was incurred, those who leave the Netherlands to join a jihadist group in a jihadist battleground, those who are 18, 19 or 20 y ears old and are living in an institution, and those who are on unpaid leave.  9 A possible exception applies to applicants aged below 27. They are obliged to look into possibilities for work or schooling for a period of four weeks before they can official ly submit their application for minimum income benefit. For some of the applicants, this compulsory search period may constitute a period of severe material deprivation.  10 For each of the two years, the reported number corresponds to the average of twelve monthly observations.  11 The central government’s budget for minimum income benefits and wage cost subsidies in 2019 amounted to € 6.1 billion. The total budget for the administration of these two schemes amounted to € 1.5 billion. This comes down to an ave rage annual budget of € 3,429 per minimum income scheme recipient or subsidised worker.  12 The largest other group corresponded to the working poor (220000 or around a third of all poor adults).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  6  considerable number, around 65 % of the minimum income benefit recipients were not at -risk of poverty13.  Non -take -up of minimum income benefit is a current concern. Th e first large data analysis that was recently conducted by the Inspectorate of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment (‘Inspectie SZW’, 2021) concluded that, at the start of 2018, 170,000 households in the Netherlands did not make use of the benefit  despite the fact that they seem to have been entitled to it. These non -take -up households represented approximately 35 % of all seemingly entitled households at that time (the other 65 % did claim the benefit). A third of the non -take -up households had a (registered) income below 20 % of the income they would receive when claiming the benefit.. Hence, two thirds had an income between 20 % and 100 % of this (maximum) amount of benefit. Of the various characteristics of recipient households that were examine d in the research, the level of income was most strongly correlated with non -take -up. Non -take -up clearly increased with households' income as a proportion of the threshold. Households with an income just below the threshold were most likely not to take up  the benefit they were entitled to. This is unsurprising given that the benefit is additional to any existing income and provides monthly income support up to the threshold only (so that the amount of benefit these households would have received was very s mall). Of all benefit entitled households with only one income source, the non -take -up rate was highest among the self -employed14. Age was also a strong predictor. Non -take -up was highest among recipients aged 26 or below and decreased for recipients with higher ages. Non -take -up was higher for adult children living at home – most likely as a result of the cost -sharing norm (‘kostendelersnorm’) – and for migrants from European countries. A third of all non -take -up persons had been non -take -up persons for at  least a year. Possible reasons for non -take -up include a lack of information (especially among younger people), a conscious choice not to claim benefits, pride and the stigma that rests on benefits, or a possible fear of having to repay considerable amoun ts of benefit in the future.15 According to the ‘Inspectie SZW’ (2021), the problem of non -take -up is not yet sufficiently recognised by municipalities. Some municipalities point at privacy regulation as a hindering factor. It may also be the case that the  financial incentives of municipalities (aimed at controlling costs) prohibit a more proactive approach. At the same time, there is considerable variation in non -take -up across municipalities which cannot be explained by demographic differences and might b e due to differences in culture or in the way the Participation Act is implemented in practice.  1.3  Adequacy  As explained in section 1.1. above, m inimum income support is a safety net of last resort. It provides monthly support up to the “social minimum”, whi ch depends on age and living situation and represents the government's norm for minimum subsistence. This social minimum represents the income threshold for eligibility (people with a net monthly income above the social minimum are not eligible for the ben efit) as well as the (maximum) amount payable to benefit recipients.   13 While stand -alone minimum income benefit is not sufficient f or a minimal standard of living, other sources of income (such as rent allowance, child budget or health care allowance) can result in a total income that exceeds the poverty threshold.  14 Possible reasons for this include the fact that the self -employed often believe they are not entitled to benefits (and municipalities typically find it hard to reach them) and because they may they may feel too proud to claim benefits.  15 As an example, in  2020 public controversy arose over a minimum income benefit recipient who had to repay thousands of euros of benefit because she had been weekly receiving groceries from her mother.   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  7  During the period from July 1st 2021 until January 1st 2022, the net amounts per month were as follows:   Singles and single parents, aged 18, 19 or 20: €266;   Couples, both aged 18, 19 or 20, without children: €533;   Couples, one of which aged 18, 19 or 20, the other aged between 21 and retirement age: €1,037;   Couples, aged 18, 19 or 20, with children: €841;   Couples, one of which aged 18, 19 or 20, the other aged between 21 and retirement age, with children: €1,345;   Singles and single parents from 21 years to retirement age: €1,079;   Couples from 21 years to retirement age, with or without children: €1,541;   Singles and single parents above retirement age: €1,200;   Couples, one or both of which above retirement age, with or without children:  €1,627;   Singles from 21 years to retirement age with one cost -sharing co -resident:  €771;   Singles from 21 years to retireme nt age with two cost -sharing co -residents: €668;   Couples from 21 years to retirement age with one cost -sharing co -resident: €1,336;   Couples from 21 years to retirement age with two cost -sharing co -residents: €1,233;   Singles and single parents residing in a n institution16: €376;   Couples residing in an institution: €607.  To express the amounts as a percentage of the poverty thresholds and minimum wage, we use the amounts for 2020 (due to data availability). The net monthly amount for a single -person aged bet ween 21 and retirement age in the second half of 2020 (€ 1,059) represented 82 % of the 2020 AROP (60 % of median) threshold (expressed as an amount per month) and 63 % of the 2020 mid -year monthly gross minimum wage for people aged 21 and above.  To compa re the mounts for a wide range of household types with their respective poverty thresholds, figure 1 shows the equivalised disposable income at the social minimum in 2018 (net monthly amounts in euros; with the use of the equivalence scale of Statistics Ne therlands, 2004) for ten different household types, in comparison to various poverty thresholds (Goderis, 2020). For households with children, child allowance and child budget were added to the norm amounts (Statistics Netherlands, 2019). For all household s in figure 1 except households composed of a couple receiving pension, the social minimum is provided by the minimum income benefit (‘algemene bijstand’). These are, consecutively, a single person aged between 23 and retirement age, a couple without child ren, couples with one, two or three child(ren), respectively, and single parents with one, two or three child(ren), respectively17. In addition to the equivalised disposable incomes, figure 1 also shows four poverty  16 This can be a n ursing home or an institution where people reside while having access to assistance or supervision more than half of the time.  17 For the additional two households (pensioners and pensioner couples), shown for comparison, the social minimum is primarily provided by the state pension (AOW).  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  8  thresholds for a single -person household . The first two correspond to the basic needs and modest -but-adequate budgets of the Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP). The former includes the expenses that can be regarded as the minimum necessary in the Netherlands (costs that are difficul t to avoid for things such as food, clothing, housing and various other expenses). The latter includes the same expenses but adds a small amount to cover the minimum cost of recreation and social participation. Both budgets are for the most part based on e xpert data from the National Institute for Family Finance Information (Nibud), an independent foundation based in the Netherlands, and have been validated through the use of consensual focus groups of Dutch citizens. The third poverty threshold shown in fi gure 1 is the low-income threshold of Statistics Netherlands (CBS). It represents a fixed amount of purchasing power at the level of social assistance for singles in 1979 (when it was historically at its highest level of generosity) and is annually adjuste d in line with the consumer price index. The fourth poverty threshold shown in figure 1 is the European Union's at -risk -of-poverty (AROP) threshold set at 60 % of the national median equivalised disposable income after social transfers. This threshold is n ot based on a reference budget, such as the SCP threshold, or the level of social assistance, such as the CBS threshold. Instead, it moves proportionally with the median disposable income in a country and hence can be viewed as fully relative. Note that th at the poverty thresholds, strictly speaking, cannot be directly compared because the respective accompanying income concepts used to measure poverty are not the same.  Figure 1.   Equivalised disposable income at the social minimum in 2018, in comparison to various p overty thresholds, (net) monthly amounts in euros   Sources: Goderis (2020), Statistics Netherlands (2019), Eurostat (2020), Goderis et al. (2018), CBS Statline (2020) and CBS (2004).  Figure 1 shows that for almost all of the eight households that depend o n the minimum income benefit (‘ algemene bijstand ’), disposable income at the social minimum is well below the level of the poverty thresholds. When compared to the Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  9  lowest poverty threshold (CBS), disposable income on average fell short by more than €100 pe r month. The only exception was the income of single parents with one child, which equalled the low -income threshold of CBS but still fell short of the SCP and AROP thresholds. These results for the working age population are in stark contrast to the level  of the state pension (AOW) for people above the retirement age. Both single pensioners and pensioner couples with a full state pension received amply more than the levels indicated by the low -income threshold of CBS and the basic needs budget of SCP, and almost received enough to cover the modest -but-adequate budget of SCP. Summarising, based on the most common estimates of what someone in the Netherlands needs to maintain a minimal standard of living, it can be concluded that the minimum income benefit al one is not sufficient.  The insufficiency of stand -alone minimum income benefit would not necessarily be a problem if people’s income from other sources (including other benefits) would be sufficient for a minimal standard of living. It turns out that this  is not the case. Depending on the poverty threshold that is used, the estimated incidence of poverty in 2018 was 3.8 % (SCP: basic needs budget), 6.2 % (SCP: modest -but-adequate budget), 7.9 % (CBS: low -income threshold) or 13.3  %  (Eurostat: AROP) of the population18. These findings suggest that, also when taking into account other income sources, Dutch minimum income benefit does not guarantee a minimally necessary standard of living, or at least not for everyone. Especially chil dren (relatively) often live below the poverty line (more than 8  % in 2017).  The current government has set a goal of reducing child poverty by half in 2030 (from its 2015 level of 9.2 %) and since 2017 has made an extra € 85 mln per year available for mu nicipalities to reduce poverty among children. It has also raised the (means tested) child budget from the third child onward by € 50 per child, starting in 2021.  Dutch minimum income support provides for a solid floor in the income distribution of the working age population but is not high enough to alleviate poverty.  1.4  Links with other benefits  Other benefits that are granted to significant numbers of minimum incom e benefit recipients are:  1. Child allowance (‘ kinderbijslag ’): Everyone who lives or works in the Netherlands (with some exceptions) and takes care of one or more children is entitled to child allowance (‘ kinderbijslag’ ). In 2018, 1.9 million (out of a to tal of 7.9 million) Dutch households received child allowance (total budget: € 3.3 billion)19. 2. Child budget (‘kindgebonden budget ’): Child budget is an income and assets tested government contribution to the costs for raising a child up to the age of 18 , paid to parents or caretakers who receive child allowance. In 2018, 764,000 (out of a total of  18 A small share of the population is disregarded. In 2018, for example, the CBS and SCP figures are based on a sample of 95% of the total population of the Netherlands. People who live in an institution or home (249,000 persons) were disregarded, as well as student househ olds and households that were not observed the whole year (606,000 persons). This is not because these households could not be at risk of poverty but because their expenditures are for the most part fixed (such as in the case of the care contribution of pe ople in an institution or home) or because their income is not fully observed (such as in the case of students that receive financial support from their parents).  19 The amounts are paid quarterly and depend only on the age of the child(ren). The amounts ar e updated twice a year based on changes in the consumer price index. Between July 1st 2021 and January 1st 2022, the amounts were equal to € 225 per quarter for each child aged 0 to 5; € 273 per quarter for each child aged 6 to 11; and € 321 per quarter fo r each child aged 12 to 17. In special circumstances where parents face unusually high costs for their children, the amounts above may be doubled. From age 16 onwards, child allowance is conditional on the child obtaining or having obtained a minimum level  of education. In all cases, the child allowance ends when the child turns 18.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  10  7.9 million) Dutch households received child budget (average annual amount: € 2,750; total budget: € 1.9 billion)20. 3. Rent allowance (‘ huurtoeslag ’): Rent al lowance is an income and assets tested government contribution to the costs of renting a home. It is not necessarily a benefit solely provided to minimum income recipients. In 2018, 1.4 million (out of a total of 7.9 million) Dutch households received rent  allowance (average annual amount: € 2,800; total budget: € 3.6 billion)21. 4. Health care allowance (‘zorgtoeslag’) : People who live or work in the Netherlands are obliged to take out basic health insurance. Health care allowance is an income and assets t ested government contribution to the cost of health insurance, in particular the health insurance premium (‘premie’) and the compulsory deductible (‘verplicht eigen risico ’)22. In 2018, 4.7 million (out of a total of 7.9 million) Dutch households received health care allowance (average annual amount: € 1,100; total budget: € 4.7 billion) . 5. Child care allowance (‘kinderopvangtoeslag’) : Child care allowance is an income tested government contribution to the costs of child care, which in 2021 cover ed at most 96 % of these costs. Parents are entitled to child care allowance when they (both) work. If they do not both work, they may still be entitled if they follow a (labour market) reintegration programme or an integration course for migrants, or if they are registered as a student at an educational institution recognized by the government. In 2018, 633,000 (out of a total of 7.9 million) Dutch households  20 The maximum annual amounts of child budget in 2021 were: 1 child: € 1,204; 2 children: € 2,226; 3 children: € 3,145; more than 3 children: € 3,145 plus € 919 for each addition al child. A supplement of € 247 is paid for children aged above 12 but below 16; a supplement of € 441 is paid for children aged 16 or 17; a supplement of € 3,242 is paid to parents without a partner. Single parents receive the maximum amount of child budg et if their annual income does not exceed € 21,835. For higher incomes, the child budget is decreased by 6.75% of the amount by which income exceeds € 21,835. Couples receive the maximum amount if their joint income does not exceed € 38,853. For higher inc omes, the child budget is decreased by 6.75% of the amount by which income exceeds € 38,853. In addition to an income test, there is also an asset test. In 2021, singles with net assets above € 118,479 and couples with net assets above € 149,819 were not entitled to child budget. The entitlement to child budget is re -assessed on a monthly basis.  21 The amount of rent allowance that people receive depends on the rent they pay, their income, their assets and those of any co -residents. In 2021, households with an adult aged above 23, could receive rent allowance only if their rent did not exceed € 752.33 per month. For other households, either the same or a lower threshold applied. In addition to this upper eligibility threshold, there is also a lower threshold,  which depends on someone's income. Above a certain level of income (threshold depending on circumstances), people do not receive any rent allowance. The amount of rent allowance is determined by applying different percentages to different layers of rent. Up to the lower threshold, no rent allowance is paid. On the part above the lower threshold but below the next threshold (‘ kwaliteitskortingsgrens ’), 100% is subsidised. With respect to the part between the ‘ kwaliteitskortingsgrens ’ and the next threshold (‘aftoppingsgrens ’), and the part above the ‘aftoppingsgrens ’, different percentages apply (65% and 40%, respectively, in 2021). In addition to an income test, there is also an asset test. In 2021, singles with net assets above € 31,340 and couples with ne t assets above € 62,680 were not entitled to rent allowance. Rent allowance is more generous towards people above retirement age.  22 Minimum income benefit recipients are not exempt from paying the premium and compulsory deductible but, just like others, ma y be entitled to health care allowance. The amount is determined by calculating a “norm premium” (‘normpremie’). In case this norm premium is lower than the standard premium, the insured person is entitled to a health care allowance equal to the difference  between the norm premium and the standard premium. For insured persons with a partner, the norm premium is compared to twice the standard premium. The norm premium is determined as a percentage of the income threshold in a given year (in 2021: 1.915% for insured persons without a partner and 4.225% for insured persons with a partner) plus a percentage of the difference between a person's income and the income threshold (in 2021: 13.580%, both for insured persons with and without a partner). The income thre shold in 2021 was € 21,835. The standard premium equals the average health insurance premium (premie) for insured persons in a given year plus the average amount that an insured person is expected to pay for the compulsory deductible (‘verplicht eigen risi co’), both calculated by the government. In 2021, the standard premium was set at € 1,705. In addition to an income test, there is also an asset test. In 2021, singles with net assets above € 118,479 and couples with net assets above € 149,819 were not ent itled to health care allowance. The entitlement to health care allowance is separately assessed for each calendar month.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  11  received child care allowance (average annual amount: € 5,000; total budget: € 2.6 billion)23. 6. Special social assistance (‘ bijzondere bijstand ’): Special social assistance is an income and assets tested government contribution to necessary costs of existence arising from special circumstances. Municipalities in 2018 spent a total of € 546 million on special social assistance24. As documented in 1.3, overall income support (including minimum income benefit as well as income from other sources, such as the additional benefits listed above), does not cover the basic necessities in life, or at least not for everyone.  2 