Impact of MI schemes  The Dutch minimu m income scheme is governed by the Participation Act (‘Participatiewet’ ). Its overall objective is that each citizen participates in society according to ability and provides for his or her own maintenance as much as possible. The first goal of the Act is to help people - including the ones with little work capacity - in finding a (preferably regular) job. The second goal is to guarantee a minimum income for everyone, including those who are not capable of providing for their own livelihood. Minimum inco me support (‘ algemene bijstand’ ) is a safety net of last resort. It tops up existing income and provides monthly support up to the “social minimum”, which depends on age and living situation and represents the government's norm for minimum subsistence. The  Participation Act is also intended to harmonise the rules and support for people with a disability or distance from the labour market. Since its introduction in 2015, they all fall under the same law with the same rights and duties. Municipalities are res ponsible for implementing the Participation Act. They have a range of options available to help people find a job. Some of these already existed, such as work experience positions or job coaching. Others are new, such as the wage cost subsidy and sheltered  work facility. In response to the Covid -19 pandemic, a new allowance was introduced within the Participation Act: the temporary emergency social assistance scheme for self -employed (‘TOZO’). TOZO was a supplementary and temporary allowance that could be u sed for topping up for instance lost income or low earnings for self -employed persons with inadequate financial resources to meet their essential living costs as a result of the pandemic.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  18  Minimum income support is targeted at people with the lowest income s. In 2019 and 2020, around 480,000 people, or 2.75 % of the Dutch population, received minimum income benefit. In addition, almost 25 % of Dutch households received child allowance (not means tested), 10 % received child allowance (means tested), 18 % rec eived rent allowance (means tested), almost 60 % received health care allowance (means tested) and 8 % received child care allowance (means tested). The Dutch system of social security (including its minimum income support and additional benefits) plays an important role in limiting poverty and income inequality. Under the Participation Act, municipalities offer a range of services to help recipients of minimum income benefit find a job. A 2019 study found that, in the six months prior to the study, non -neg ligible shares of regular minimum income benefit recipients (which constitute at least 90 % of all recipients) had had one or more interviews with a staff member of social services on possibilities to find a job (27 %), had received help with writing an application letter or cv (18 %), had followed a reintegration process for people who are not yet fit for work (18 %), had been assigned a work experience position (17 %), had received job application training (15 %), had participated in a training course or schooling (excl. job application training) (15 %), had received help with searching for vacancies (10 %), had taken a competence test (7 %), had received help with job interviews (6 %), had been introduced to a potential employer (6 %), or had received a job vacancy (5 %) (Inspectorate SZW, 2019)31.  While the main goal of the Participation Act is to help people in finding a (preferably regular) job, many municipalities also recognise and try to address multidimensional needs32. Various types of targeted so cial services are routinely provided to minimum income benefit recipients (although the extent to which varies across municipalities)33.  Despite the important role of social security in limiting poverty and the range of social services aimed at labour mar ket activation and multidimensional wellbeing, important challenges remain and in some cases have become more severe. When evaluated against the most commonly used poverty thresholds, Dutch minimum income benefit does not guarantee a minimally necessary st andard of living, or at least not for everyone. Even when taking into account other sources of income as well (including additional benefits), between 4 and 13 % of the Dutch population (depending on the poverty – or at -risk -of-poverty – threshold used) wa s estimated to be poor in 2018. COVID -19 is likely to have increased poverty from 2020 onwards, although the unprecedented support package will have substantially cushioned these adverse effects (Adema et al., 2021).People on minimum income benefit are esp ecially likely to live below the poverty line, with estimated probabilities varying from 35 to 75 percent (Hoff et al., 2019; Statistics Netherlands, 2019). When comparing poverty rates  31 Recipients continue to receive full minimum income benefits when participating in active labour marke t policies. In fact, participating in such activities is typically a requirement for receiving full benefits.  32 In fact, one of the reasons to shift the responsibility for minimum income benefit recipients to municipalities in the Participation Act was the  notion that municipalities are well positioned to assess and address multidimensional needs of people. It was expected that this would make it easier to implement an integral approach to the multiple problems that clients are faced with.  33 The Inspectorat e SZW ( 2019) found that, in the six months prior to the study, non -negligible shares of regular recipients (which constitute at least 90 % of all recipients) had received support through the social support law (22 %), had received mental health care suppor t (17 %), had received debt counselling (14 %), had received psychological, mental or physical support through foundations or associations (6 %), had received youth care (5 %), had received support from a rehabilitation doctor (4 %), or had received suppor t for homeless people (4 %). The proportions of recipients that had received support in the form of language courses, sports and exercise coaching, support in finding or keeping volunteer work, activities aimed at social participation, and daytime activiti es are unknown. While expenditures on these targeted social services may in many cases be the result of government efforts within the domain of the Participation Act, the expenditures themselves are often covered by other budgets.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  19  among different age groups, children face the highest risk of being po or (8 %).34 People aged 90 and above are also particularly vulnerable because some of them incur considerable health -related costs (Hoff et al., 2019).  In addition to age, migration background also matters. 12% of all adult migrants is poor, compared to on ly 3% of adult natives. Prevalence is especially high among (first -generation) non -western migrants and – within that group –among those from refugee countries. Syrians face the highest risk of being poor (54 %).  The current government has set a goal of r educing child poverty by half in 2030 (from its 2015 level of 9.2 %) and since 2017 has made an extra € 85 mln per year available for municipalities to reduce poverty among children. It has also raised the (means tested) child budget from the third child o nward by €50 per child, starting in 2021. At the same time, due to a government decision in 2011, the level of the minimum income benefit (‘algemene bijstand’) has been gradually falling since 2012 and is expected to continue doing so until 2035, relative to counterfactual35. A recent simulation study found that this is expected to increase poverty from 5.3 % of the Dutch population in 2021 to 6.8 % in 2035, taking into account other planned policies but keeping everything else constant. The same study also  showed that policymakers have options to reduce poverty but that doing so costs money and/or jobs (CPB/SCP, 2020).  To summarize: Dutch minimum income support lays a solid floor in the income distribution of the working age population but is currently not  high enough to eradicate poverty. In addition to the concern that minimum income support is insufficient to guarantee a m inimally necessary standard of living, there are also concerns about the chances of benefit recipients finding work and about their so cial integration. The Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP) carried out an evaluation of the Participation Act in 2019, commissioned by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment (SZW). It focused on the question to what extent and in which wa y the Act leads people to work. The results showed that the Act had until then hardly reached its goal of more people with a distance to the labour market finding a (preferably regular) job. For some groups the chances of finding a job had even decreased. In particular, the chances of so -called ‘classic minimum income benefit recipients’36 without a job finding one within the next year were already low before the introduction of the Act (on average 7 % over the period 2008 -2015) and barely increased afterwa rds (on average 8 % over the period 2015 -2017). The quality of the jobs found by this group declined: fewer jobs with a duration of at least a year, fewer permanent contracts, more ‘small jobs’ (20 hours per week or less) and fewer full-time jobs. While th e chances of 18 year -old disabled people with a capacity for work finding work within the next year improved from 22 to 28 %, their income position in fact deteriorated because they often no longer have a right to benefits. People who were previously on th e waiting list for a sheltered employment placement and who now fall under the Participation Act saw their chances of finding a job within the next four years decline from 55 to 39 % after the introduction of the Act. They are also more often in temporary jobs, although more frequently than before with  34 The high incidence of c hild poverty can be (at least) partly attributed to the Dutch tax -benefit system (including minimum income support). Caminada et al. (2019) document that the Dutch system in comparison to systems of other countries takes a middle position when it comes to lifting people of working age out of poverty. However, it performs among the worst when it comes to alleviating child poverty and among the best when it comes to preventing poverty among the elderly.  35 The decision was motivated by the concern that, given the earlier decision to gradually reduce the net minimum wage, keeping minimum income benefit unchanged would erode the work incentives of benefit recipients.  36 Recipients that prior to the introduction of the Act already fell under the responsibility of local authorities. In 2018, this group constituted almost 90 % of all recipients.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  20  mainstream employers. What these results seem to indicate, is that these vulnerable groups have suffered from the one -size -fits-all approach of the Act.  The main reintegration goal of the Participation Act is  focused on helping people find a job but the budget typically limits the possibilities for caseworkers to help clients improve their multidimensional wellbeing (see also Berenschot, 2021). This is further aggravated by financial incentives that typically make municipalities focus on the benefit recipients with the best labour market prospects. As a result, despite municipalities’ efforts, the substantial group of minimum income benefit recipients with a large distance to the labour market often receives re latively little guidance and support.  Another concern with the Participation Act relates to its eligibility criteria. S ome argue that the (tighter enforcement of) existing obligations and the introduction of new obligations (e.g. relocation, clothing and language duties) in recent years constitute an unjust treatment of benefit recipients (see for example Kampen, Sebrechts, Knijn and Tonkens (eds.), 2020).  Non -take -up of minimum income benefit is also a current concern. The first large data analysis that was recently conducted by the Inspectorate of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment (‘Inspectie SZW’, 2021) concluded that, at the start of 2018, 170,000 households in the Netherlands did not make use of the benefit despite the fact that they were probably entitled to it. These non -take -up households represented approximately 35% of all entitled households at that time. A third of the non -take -up households had a (registered) income below 20% of the threshold ('sociaal minimum').  An important limitation when assessing the effectiveness of minimum income support is that, due the unavailability of data, we do not observe the part of households’ disposable income that originates from municipal support. This means for example that we do know how much regular social assistance (‘algemene bijstand’) individual households receive but we do not know how much special social assistance (‘bijzondere bijstand’) they get. It would be good if all municipalities make this information available in the future in order to obtain a more complete picture of the resources and support offered to benefit recipients (Bos et al., 2018).   Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  21  6 