Summary  The Dutch minimum income scheme is governed by the Participation Act (‘Participatiewet’). It targets people with work capacity who (temporarily) need support in providing for their livelihood and/or in finding a job. Its overall objective is that each citizen participates in society according to their ability and provides for  their own maintenance as much as possible. M unicipalities are responsible for implementation of the Act. The first goal of the Participation Act is to help people - including the ones with little work capacity - in finding a (preferably regular) job. The second goal is to guarantee a minimum income for everyone, including those who are not capable of providing for their own livelihood. The Act is intended to harmonise the previously distinct rules and support for people with a work -limiting disability or w ho are far removed from the labour market. Since its introduction in 2015, they all fall under the same law with the same rights and duties. People who receive disability benefit on the basis of the Disability Insurance Act (‘WAO’) or the Work and Income according to Work Capacity Law (‘WIA’) do not fall under the Participation Act. These are employees who – due to illness or disability – became (partially or fully) incapable of working but were not incapable before starting their jobs.   Minimum income sup port is a safety net of last resort. It tops up existing income, if any, and provides monthly support up to the social minimum, which depends on age and living situation and represents the government's norm for minimum subsistence. Support is targeted at p eople with the lowest incomes. In 2019 and 2020, around 480,000 people (2.75 % of the Dutch population) received minimum income benefit. Other benefits that are granted to significant numbers of minimum income benefit recipients are child allowance, child budget, rent allowance, health care allowance, child care allowance and special social assistance.  While income inequality in the Netherlands is relatively low and the Dutch tax -benefit system plays an important role in limiting poverty, there are substant ial concerns about the effectiveness of the Participation Act. When evaluated against the most commonly used poverty thresholds, minimum income support does not guarantee a minimally necessary standard of living, or at least not for everyone. Even when tak ing into account other sources of income (including additional benefits), between 4 and 13 % of the Dutch population (depending on the poverty – or at -risk -of-poverty – threshold used) was estimated to be poor in 2018. Especially children relatively often live below the poverty line. The current government has taken some initiatives to address (child ) poverty. At the same time, due to a government decision in 2011, the constant -price level of the minimum income benefit has been falling since 2012 and is exp ected to continue doing so until 2035, everything else being equal. This is expected to raise the poverty rate by a quarter, everything else being equal (Olsthoorn et al., 2020).  There are also concerns about the chances of benefit recipients finding work . The Netherlands Institute for Social Research (SCP) carried out an evaluation of the Participation Act in 2019. The results showed that the Act had until then hardly reached its goal of more people distant from the labour market finding a (preferably regular) job. For some groups the chances of finding a job had even decreased, everything else being equal.  The Participation Act does not prescribe a uniform multidimensional assessment of social needs. However, municipalities in varying degrees recognise a nd try to address such needs, although the available budget typically limits the possibilities. This is further aggravated by financial incentives that typically make municipalities focus on the benefit recipients with the best labour market prospects. As a result, the substantial group of recipients with a large distance to the labour market often receives relatively little guidance and support.  Exploratory study: filling in the knowledge gaps and identifying strengths and challenges in the effectiveness of the EU Member States’ minimum income schemes   February, 2022  2  Another concern with the Participation Act relates to its eligibility criteria. S ome argue that the tighter enfo rcement of existing obligations and the introduction of new obligations (e.g. relocation, clothing and language duties) in recent years constitute an unjust treatment of benefit recipients (see for example Kampen, Sebrechts, Knijn and Tonkens (eds.), 2020) .  Finally, non -take -up of minimum income benefit is also a current concern. The Inspectorate SZW (‘ Inspectie SZW’) (2021) concluded that, at the start of 2018, 170,000 households in the Netherlands did not make use of the benefit despite the fact that the y seem to have been entitled to it. These non -take -up households represented approximately 35 % of all seemingly entitled households at that time (the other 65 % did claim the benefit). A third of the non -take -up households had a (registered) income below 20 % of the income they would receive when claiming the benefit.  The following sections, first, outline the features of the MI support in place; secondly, describe the eligibility criteria and coverage and consider  the adequacy of the financial support p rovided and the links with other benefits; thirdly, examine the extent of integration with labour market measures to help those supported into employment; fourthly, consider the access provided for the people concerned to social services; fifthly, summaris e the governance mechanisms in place; and, finally, review the evidence on the impact on reducing poverty and assisting beneficiaries to find work.  An annex outlines the underlying situation in terms of the relative number of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion and the changes that have occurred over recent years, as well as the characteristics of the people concerned – their gender, age, employment status, education level, country of birth and the structure of the households in which they live. As such, it provides the context in which MI support is operating and indicates the groups on which support needs to be targeted.   1 